m49404

> In this section, you will:
>
> Use the Law of Sines to solve oblique triangles.
>
> Find the area of an oblique triangle using the sine function.
>
> Solve applied problems using the Law of Sines.

aea1516b-dcb8-4853-a3b6-b15775067250

To ensure the safety of over 5,000 U.S. aircraft flying simultaneously
during peak times, air traffic controllers monitor and communicate with
them after receiving data from the robust radar beacon system. Suppose
two radar stations located 20 miles apart each detect an aircraft
between them. The angle of elevation measured by the first station is 35
degrees, whereas the angle of elevation measured by the second station
is 15 degrees. How can we determine the altitude of the aircraft? We see
in [\#](#) that the triangle formed by the aircraft and the two stations
is not a right triangle, so we cannot use what we know about right
triangles. In this section, we will find out how to solve problems
involving non-right triangles.

<figure id="Figure_08_01_001">

</figure>

# Using the Law of Sines to Solve Oblique Triangles {#fs-id1165137629477}

In any triangle, we can draw an altitude, a perpendicular line from one
vertex to the opposite side, forming two right triangles. It would be
preferable, however, to have methods that we can apply directly to
non-right triangles without first having to create right triangles.

Any triangle that is not a right triangle is an oblique triangle.
Solving an oblique triangle means finding the measurements of all three
angles and all three sides. To do so, we need to start with at least
three of these values, including at least one of the sides. We will
investigate three possible oblique triangle problem situations:

ASA (angle-side-angle)

We know the measurements of two angles and the included side. See

.

<figure id="Figure_08_01_002">

</figure>

AAS (angle-angle-side)

We know the measurements of two angles and a side that is not between
the known angles. See

.

<figure id="Figure_08_01_003">

</figure>

SSA (side-side-angle)

We know the measurements of two sides and an angle that is not between
the known sides. See

.

<figure id="Figure_08_01_004">

</figure>

Knowing how to approach each of these situations enables us to solve
oblique triangles without having to drop a perpendicular to form two
right triangles. Instead, we can use the fact that the ratio of the
measurement of one of the angles to the length of its opposite side will
be equal to the other two ratios of angle measure to opposite side.
Let's see how this statement is derived by considering the triangle
shown in [\#](#).

<figure id="Figure_08_01_005">

</figure>

Using the right triangle relationships, we know that sinα= h b and sinβ=
h a . Solving both equations for h gives two different expressions for
h.

$$h = b\sin\;\alpha\;\text{and}\; h = a\sin\;\beta$$

We then set the expressions equal to each other.

$$\begin{array}{ll}
{b\sin\;\alpha = a\sin\;\beta} & \\
{\left( \frac{1}{ab} \right)(b\sin\;\alpha) = (a\sin\;\beta)\left( \frac{1}{ab} \right)\begin{array}{llll}
 & & & 
\end{array}} & {\text{Multiply~both~sides~by}\;\frac{1}{ab}.} \\
{\frac{\sin\;\alpha}{a} = \frac{\sin\;\beta}{b}} & 
\end{array}$$

Similarly, we can compare the other ratios.

$$\frac{\sin\;\alpha}{a} = \frac{\sin\;\gamma}{c}\;\text{and}\;\frac{\sin\;\beta}{b} = \frac{\sin\;\gamma}{c}$$

Collectively, these relationships are called the *Law of Sines*.

$$\frac{\sin\;\alpha}{a} = \frac{\sin\;\beta}{b} = \frac{\sin\;\gamma}{c}$$

Note the standard way of labeling triangles: angle α (alpha) is opposite
side a; angle β (beta) is opposite side b; and angle γ (gamma) is
opposite side c. See [\#](#).

While calculating angles and sides, be sure to carry the exact values
through to the final answer. Generally, final answers are rounded to the
nearest tenth, unless otherwise specified.

<figure id="Figure_08_01_006">

</figure>

:::: {#fs-id1165133141415 .note}
::: title
Law of Sines
:::

Given a triangle with angles and opposite sides labeled as in [\#](#),
the ratio of the measurement of an angle to the length of its opposite
side will be equal to the other two ratios of angle measure to opposite
side. All proportions will be equal. The Law of Sines is based on
proportions and is presented symbolically two ways.

$$\frac{\sin\;\alpha}{a} = \frac{\sin\;\beta}{b} = \frac{\sin\;\gamma}{c}$$

$$\frac{a}{\sin\;\alpha} = \frac{b}{\sin\;\beta} = \frac{c}{\sin\;\gamma}$$

To solve an oblique triangle, use any pair of applicable ratios.
::::

::: {#Example_08_01_01 .example}
Solve the triangle shown in [\#](#) to the nearest tenth.

<figure id="Figure_08_01_007">

</figure>

The three angles must add up to 180 degrees. From this, we can determine
that

$$\begin{array}{l}
\begin{array}{l}
 \\
{\beta = 180{^\circ} - 50{^\circ} - 30{^\circ}}
\end{array} \\
{= 100{^\circ}}
\end{array}$$

To find an unknown side, we need to know the corresponding angle and a
known ratio. We know that angle α=50° and its corresponding side a=10.
We can use the following proportion from the Law of Sines to find the
length of c.

$$\begin{array}{llllll}
{\frac{\sin(50{^\circ})}{10} = \frac{\sin(30{^\circ})}{c}} & & & & & \\
{c\frac{\sin(50{^\circ})}{10} = \sin(30{^\circ})} & & & & & {\text{Multiply~both~sides~by}\; c.} \\
{c = \sin(30{^\circ})\frac{10}{\sin(50{^\circ})}} & & & & & {\text{Multiply~by~the~reciprocal~to~isolate}\; c.} \\
{c \approx 6.5} & & & & & 
\end{array}$$

Similarly, to solve for b, we set up another proportion.

$$\begin{array}{ll}
\begin{array}{l}
 \\
{\frac{\sin(50{^\circ})}{10} = \frac{\sin(100{^\circ})}{b}}
\end{array} & \\
{b\sin(50{^\circ}) = 10\sin(100{^\circ})} & {\text{Multiply~both~sides~by}\; b.} \\
{b = \frac{10\sin(100{^\circ})}{\sin(50{^\circ})}\begin{array}{llll}
 & & & 
\end{array}} & {\text{Multiply~by~the~reciprocal~to~isolate}\; b.} \\
{b \approx 12.9} & 
\end{array}$$

Therefore, the complete set of angles and sides is

$$\begin{array}{l}
\begin{array}{l}
 \\
{\alpha = 50{^\circ}\quad a = 10}
\end{array} \\
{\beta = 100{^\circ}\quad b \approx 12.9} \\
{\gamma = 30{^\circ}\quad c \approx 6.5}
\end{array}$$
:::

:::: {#fs-id1165134164931 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Solve the triangle shown in [\#](#) to the nearest tenth.

<figure id="Figure_08_01_008">

</figure>

α= 98 ∘ a=34.6 β= 39 ∘ b=22 γ= 43 ∘ c=23.8
::::

# Using The Law of Sines to Solve SSA Triangles {#fs-id1165135199352}

We can use the Law of Sines to solve any oblique triangle, but some
solutions may not be straightforward. In some cases, more than one
triangle may satisfy the given criteria, which we describe as an
ambiguous case. Triangles classified as SSA, those in which we know the
lengths of two sides and the measurement of the angle opposite one of
the given sides, may result in one or two solutions, or even no
solution.

:::: {#fs-id1165134481112 .note}
::: title
Possible Outcomes for SSA Triangles
:::

Oblique triangles in the category SSA may have four different outcomes.
[\#](#) illustrates the solutions with the known sides a and b and known
angle α.

<figure id="Figure_08_01_009">

</figure>
::::

::: {#Example_08_01_02 .example}
Solve the triangle in [\#](#) for the missing side and find the missing
angle measures to the nearest tenth.

<figure id="Figure_08_01_010">

</figure>

Use the Law of Sines to find angle β and angle γ, and then side c.
Solving for β, we have the proportion

$$\begin{array}{r}
{\frac{\sin\;\alpha}{a} = \frac{\sin\;\beta}{b}} \\
{\frac{\sin(35{^\circ})}{6} = \frac{\sin\;\beta}{8}} \\
{\frac{8\sin(35{^\circ})}{6} = \sin\;\beta} \\
{0.7648 \approx \sin\;\beta} \\
{\sin^{- 1}(0.7648) \approx 49.9{^\circ}} \\
{\beta \approx 49.9{^\circ}\operatorname{}}
\end{array}$$

However, in the diagram, angle β appears to be an obtuse angle and may
be greater than 90°. How did we get an acute angle, and how do we find
the measurement of β? Let's investigate further. Dropping a
perpendicular from γ and viewing the triangle from a right angle
perspective, we have [\#](#). It appears that there may be a second
triangle that will fit the given criteria.

<figure id="Figure_08_01_011">

</figure>

The angle supplementary to β is approximately equal to 49.9°, which
means that β=180°−49.9°=130.1°. (Remember that the sine function is
positive in both the first and second quadrants.) Solving for γ, we have

$$\gamma = 180{^\circ} - 35{^\circ} - 130.1{^\circ} \approx 14.9{^\circ}$$

We can then use these measurements to solve the other triangle. Since γ
′ is supplementary to the sum of α ′ and β ′ , we have

$$\gamma' = 180{^\circ} - 35{^\circ} - 49.9{^\circ} \approx 95.1{^\circ}$$

Now we need to find c and c ′ .

We have

$$\begin{array}{l}
{\frac{c}{\sin(14.9{^\circ})} = \frac{6}{\sin(35{^\circ})}} \\
{\; c = \frac{6\sin(14.9{^\circ})}{\sin(35{^\circ})} \approx 2.7}
\end{array}$$

Finally,

$$\begin{array}{l}
{\frac{c'}{\sin(95.1{^\circ})} = \frac{6}{\sin(35{^\circ})}} \\
{c' = \frac{6\sin(95.1{^\circ})}{\sin(35{^\circ})} \approx 10.4}
\end{array}$$

To summarize, there are two triangles with an angle of 35°, an adjacent
side of 8, and an opposite side of 6, as shown in [\#](#).

<figure id="Figure_08_01_012">

</figure>

However, we were looking for the values for the triangle with an obtuse
angle β. We can see them in the first triangle (a) in [\#](#).
:::

:::: {#fs-id1165135378681 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Given α=80°,a=120, and b=121, find the missing side and angles. If there
is more than one possible solution, show both.

Solution 1

$$\begin{array}{ll}
{\alpha = 80{^\circ}} & {a = 120} \\
{\beta \approx 83.2{^\circ}} & {b = 121} \\
{\gamma \approx 16.8{^\circ}} & {c \approx 35.2}
\end{array}$$

Solution 2

$$\begin{array}{l}
{\alpha' = 80{^\circ}\; a' = 120} \\
{\beta' \approx 96.8{^\circ}\; b' = 121} \\
{\gamma' \approx 3.2{^\circ}\; c' \approx 6.8}
\end{array}$$
::::

::: {#Example_08_01_03 .example}
In the triangle shown in [\#](#), solve for the unknown side and angles.
Round your answers to the nearest tenth.

<figure id="Figure_08_01_014">

</figure>

In choosing the pair of ratios from the Law of Sines to use, look at the
information given. In this case, we know the angle γ=85°, and its
corresponding side c=12, and we know side b=9. We will use this
proportion to solve for β.

$$\begin{array}{ll}
{\frac{\sin(85{^\circ})}{12} = \frac{\sin\;\beta}{9}\begin{array}{llll}
 & & & 
\end{array}} & {\text{Isolate~the~unknown}.} \\
{\frac{9\sin(85{^\circ})}{12} = \sin\;\beta} & 
\end{array}$$

To find β, apply the inverse sine function. The inverse sine will
produce a single result, but keep in mind that there may be two values
for β. It is important to verify the result, as there may be two viable
solutions, only one solution (the usual case), or no solutions.

$$\begin{array}{l}
{\beta = \sin^{- 1}\left( \frac{9\sin(85{^\circ})}{12} \right)} \\
{\beta \approx \sin^{- 1}(0.7471)} \\
{\beta \approx 48.3{^\circ}}
\end{array}$$

In this case, if we subtract β from 180°, we find that there may be a
second possible solution. Thus, β=180°−48.3°≈131.7°. To check the
solution, subtract both angles, 131.7° and 85°, from 180°. This gives

$$\alpha = 180{^\circ} - 85{^\circ} - 131.7{^\circ} \approx - 36.7{^\circ},$$

which is impossible, and so β≈48.3°.

To find the remaining missing values, we calculate
α=180°−85°−48.3°≈46.7°. Now, only side a is needed. Use the Law of Sines
to solve for a by one of the proportions.

$$\begin{array}{l}
\begin{array}{l}
 \\
\begin{array}{l}
 \\
{\frac{\sin(85{^\circ})}{12} = \frac{\sin(46.7{^\circ})}{a}}
\end{array}
\end{array} \\
{a\frac{\sin(85{^\circ})}{12} = \sin(46.7{^\circ})} \\
{a = \frac{12\sin(46.7{^\circ})}{\sin(85{^\circ})} \approx 8.8}
\end{array}$$

The complete set of solutions for the given triangle is

$$\begin{array}{l}
\begin{array}{l}
 \\
{\alpha \approx 46.7{^\circ}\quad a \approx 8.8}
\end{array} \\
{\beta \approx 48.3{^\circ}\quad b = 9} \\
{\gamma = 85{^\circ}\quad c = 12}
\end{array}$$
:::

:::: {#fs-id1165135417780 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Given α=80°,a=100,b=10, find the missing side and angles. If there is
more than one possible solution, show both. Round your answers to the
nearest tenth.

β≈5.7°,γ≈94.3°,c≈101.3
::::

::: {#Example_08_01_04 .example}
Find all possible triangles if one side has length 4 opposite an angle
of 50°, and a second side has length 10.

Using the given information, we can solve for the angle opposite the
side of length 10. See [\#](#).

$$\begin{array}{l}
{\frac{\sin\;\alpha}{10} = \frac{\sin(50{^\circ})}{4}} \\
{\sin\;\alpha = \frac{10\sin(50{^\circ})}{4}} \\
{\sin\;\alpha \approx 1.915}
\end{array}$$

<figure id="Figure_08_01_015">

</figure>

We can stop here without finding the value of α. Because the range of
the sine function is \[ −1,1 \], it is impossible for the sine value to
be 1.915. In fact, inputting sin −1 ( 1.915 ) in a graphing calculator
generates an ERROR DOMAIN. Therefore, no triangles can be drawn with the
provided dimensions.
:::

:::: {#fs-id1165137812541 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Determine the number of triangles possible given a=31, b=26, β=48°.

two
::::

# Finding the Area of an Oblique Triangle Using the Sine Function {#fs-id1165135650693}

Now that we can solve a triangle for missing values, we can use some of
those values and the sine function to find the area of an oblique
triangle. Recall that the area formula for a triangle is given as Area=
1 2 bh, where b is base and h is height. For oblique triangles, we must
find h before we can use the area formula. Observing the two triangles
in [\#](#), one acute and one obtuse, we can drop a perpendicular to
represent the height and then apply the trigonometric property sinα=
opposite hypotenuse to write an equation for area in oblique triangles.
In the acute triangle, we have sinα= h c or csinα=h. However, in the
obtuse triangle, we drop the perpendicular outside the triangle and
extend the base b to form a right triangle. The angle used in
calculation is α ′ , or 180−α.

<figure id="Figure_08_01_016">

</figure>

Thus,

$$\text{Area} = \frac{1}{2}\left( \text{base} \right)\left( \text{height} \right) = \frac{1}{2}b\left( {c\sin\;\alpha} \right)$$

Similarly,

$$\text{Area} = \frac{1}{2}a\left( {b\sin\;\gamma} \right) = \frac{1}{2}a\left( {c\sin\;\beta} \right)$$

:::: {#fs-id1165135317669 .note}
::: title
Area of an Oblique Triangle
:::

The formula for the area of an oblique triangle is given by

$$\begin{array}{l}
{\text{Area} = \frac{1}{2}bc\sin\;\alpha} \\
{= \frac{1}{2}ac\sin\;\beta} \\
{= \frac{1}{2}ab\sin\;\gamma}
\end{array}$$

This is equivalent to one-half of the product of two sides and the sine
of their included angle.
::::

::: {#Example_08_01_05 .example}
Find the area of a triangle with sides a=90,b=52, and angle γ=102°.
Round the area to the nearest integer.

Using the formula, we have

$$\begin{array}{l}
{\text{Area} = \frac{1}{2}ab\sin\;\gamma} \\
{\text{Area} = \frac{1}{2}(90)(52)\sin(102{^\circ})} \\
{\text{Area} \approx 2289\;\text{square}\;\text{units}}
\end{array}$$
:::

:::: {#fs-id1165137419119 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Find the area of the triangle given β=42°, a=7.2ft, c=3.4ft. Round the
area to the nearest tenth.

about 8.2 square feet
::::

# Solving Applied Problems Using the Law of Sines {#fs-id1165135381204}

The more we study trigonometric applications, the more we discover that
the applications are countless. Some are flat, diagram-type situations,
but many applications in calculus, engineering, and physics involve
three dimensions and motion.

::: {#Example_08_01_06 .example}
Find the altitude of the aircraft in the problem introduced at the
beginning of this section, shown in [\#](#). Round the altitude to the
nearest tenth of a mile.

<figure id="Figure_08_01_017">

</figure>

To find the elevation of the aircraft, we first find the distance from
one station to the aircraft, such as the side a, and then use right
triangle relationships to find the height of the aircraft, h.

Because the angles in the triangle add up to 180 degrees, the unknown
angle must be 180°−15°−35°=130°. This angle is opposite the side of
length 20, allowing us to set up a Law of Sines relationship.

$$\begin{array}{l}
\begin{array}{l}
\begin{array}{l}
 \\

\end{array} \\
{\frac{\sin(130{^\circ})}{20} = \frac{\sin(35{^\circ})}{a}}
\end{array} \\
{a\sin(130{^\circ}) = 20\sin(35{^\circ})} \\
{a = \frac{20\sin(35{^\circ})}{\sin(130{^\circ})}} \\
{a \approx 14.98}
\end{array}$$

The distance from one station to the aircraft is about 14.98 miles.

Now that we know a, we can use right triangle relationships to solve for
h.

$$\begin{array}{l}
{\sin(15{^\circ}) = \frac{\text{opposite}}{\text{hypotenuse}}} \\
{\sin(15{^\circ}) = \frac{h}{a}} \\
{\sin(15{^\circ}) = \frac{h}{14.98}} \\
{h = 14.98\sin(15{^\circ})} \\
{h \approx 3.88}
\end{array}$$

The aircraft is at an altitude of approximately 3.9 miles.
:::

:::: {#fs-id1165137722156 .note}
::: title
:::

The diagram shown in [\#](#) represents the height of a blimp flying
over a football stadium. Find the height of the blimp if the angle of
elevation at the southern end zone, point A, is 70°, the angle of
elevation from the northern end zone, point B, is 62°, and the distance
between the viewing points of the two end zones is 145 yards.

<figure id="Figure_08_01_018">

</figure>

161.9 yd.
::::

:::: {#fs-id1165137896860 .note}
::: title
:::

Media

Access these online resources for additional instruction and practice
with trigonometric applications.

Law of Sines: The Basics

Law of Sines: The Ambiguous Case
::::

# Key Equations {#fs-id1165137732417}

  ---------------------------- ---------------------------------------------------
  Law of Sines                 sinα a = sinβ b = sinγ c a sinα = b sinβ = c sinγ
  Area for oblique triangles   Area= 1 2 bcsinα = 1 2 acsinβ = 1 2 absinγ
  ---------------------------- ---------------------------------------------------

# Key Concepts {#fs-id1165135252053}

The Law of Sines can be used to solve oblique triangles, which are
non-right triangles.

According to the Law of Sines, the ratio of the measurement of one of
the angles to the length of its opposite side equals the other two
ratios of angle measure to opposite side.

There are three possible cases: ASA, AAS, SSA. Depending on the
information given, we can choose the appropriate equation to find the
requested solution. See

.

The ambiguous case arises when an oblique triangle can have different
outcomes.

There are three possible cases that arise from SSA arrangement---a
single solution, two possible solutions, and no solution. See

and

.

The Law of Sines can be used to solve triangles with given criteria. See

.

The general area formula for triangles translates to oblique triangles
by first finding the appropriate height value. See

.

There are many trigonometric applications. They can often be solved by
first drawing a diagram of the given information and then using the
appropriate equation. See

.

# Section Exercises {#fs-id1165134534154}

## Verbal {#fs-id1165134534157}

Describe the altitude of a triangle.

The altitude extends from any vertex to the opposite side or to the line
containing the opposite side at a 90° angle.

Compare right triangles and oblique triangles.

When can you use the Law of Sines to find a missing angle?

When the known values are the side opposite the missing angle and
another side and its opposite angle.

In the Law of Sines, what is the relationship between the angle in the
numerator and the side in the denominator?

What type of triangle results in an ambiguous case?

A triangle with two given sides and a non-included angle.

## Algebraic {#fs-id1165134237172}

For the following exercises, assume α is opposite side a,β is opposite
side b, and γ is opposite side c. Solve each triangle, if possible.
Round each answer to the nearest tenth.

α=43°,γ=69°,a=20

α=35°,γ=73°,c=20

β=72°,a≈12.0,b≈19.9

α=60°, β=60°, γ=60°

a=4, α= 60° , β=100°

γ=20°,b≈4.5,c≈1.6

b=10, β=95°,γ= 30°

For the following exercises, use the Law of Sines to solve for the
missing side for each oblique triangle. Round each answer to the nearest
hundredth. Assume that angle A is opposite side a, angle B is opposite
side b, and angle C is opposite side c.

Find side b when A=37°, B=49°, c=5.

b≈3.78

Find side a when A=132°,C=23°,b=10.

Find side c when B=37°,C=21°, b=23.

c≈13.70

For the following exercises, assume α is opposite side a,β is opposite
side b, and γ is opposite side c. Determine whether there is no
triangle, one triangle, or two triangles. Then solve each triangle, if
possible. Round each answer to the nearest tenth.

α=119°,a=14,b=26

γ=113°,b=10,c=32

one triangle, α≈50.3°,β≈16.7°,a≈26.7

b=3.5, c=5.3, γ= 80°

a=12, c=17, α= 35°

two triangles, γ≈54.3°,β≈90.7°,b≈20.9 or γ ′ ≈125.7°, β ′ ≈19.3°, b ′
≈6.9

a=20.5, b=35.0, β= 25°

a=7, c=9, α=43°

two triangles, β≈75.7°,γ≈61.3°,b≈9.9 or β ′ ≈18.3°, γ ′ ≈118.7°, b ′
≈3.2

a=7,b=3,β=24°

b=13,c=5,γ=10°

two triangles, α≈143.2°,β≈26.8°,a≈17.3 or α ′ ≈16.8°, β ′ ≈153.2°, a ′
≈8.3

a=2.3,c=1.8,γ=28°

β=119°,b=8.2,a=11.3

no triangle possible

For the following exercises, use the Law of Sines to solve, if possible,
the missing side or angle for each triangle or triangles in the
ambiguous case. Round each answer to the nearest tenth.

Find angle A when a=24,b=5,B=22°.

Find angle A when a=13,b=6,B=20°.

A≈47.8° or A ′ ≈ 132.2°

Find angle B when A=12°,a=2,b=9.

For the following exercises, find the area of the triangle with the
given measurements. Round each answer to the nearest tenth.

a=5,c=6,β= 35°

8.6

b=11,c=8,α= 28°

a=32,b=24,γ= 75°

370.9

a=7.2,b=4.5,γ= 43°

## Graphical {#fs-id1165134257560}

For the following exercises, find the length of side x. Round to the
nearest tenth.

12.3

12.2

16.0

For the following exercises, find the measure of angle x, if possible.
Round to the nearest tenth.

29.7°

x=76.9°orx=103.1°

Notice that x is an obtuse angle.

110.6°

For the following exercise, solve the triangle. Round each answer to the
nearest tenth.

A≈39.4,C≈47.6,BC≈20.7

For the following exercises, find the area of each triangle. Round each
answer to the nearest tenth.

57.1

42.0

430.2

## Extensions {#fs-id1165134418962}

Find the radius of the circle in [\#](#). Round to the nearest tenth.

<figure id="Figure_08_01_221">

</figure>

Find the diameter of the circle in [\#](#). Round to the nearest tenth.

<figure id="Figure_08_01_222">

</figure>

10.1

Find m∠ADC in [\#](#). Round to the nearest tenth.

<figure id="Figure_08_01_223">

</figure>

Find AD in [\#](#). Round to the nearest tenth.

<figure id="Figure_08_01_224">

</figure>

AD≈13.8

Solve both triangles in [\#](#). Round each answer to the nearest tenth.

<figure id="Figure_08_01_225">

</figure>

Find AB in the parallelogram shown in [\#](#).

<figure id="Figure_08_01_226">

</figure>

AB≈2.8

Solve the triangle in [\#](#). (Hint: Draw a perpendicular from H to
JK). Round each answer to the nearest tenth.

<figure id="Figure_08_01_227">

</figure>

Solve the triangle in [\#](#). (Hint: Draw a perpendicular from N to
LM). Round each answer to the nearest tenth.

<figure id="Figure_08_01_228">

</figure>

L≈49.7,N≈56.3,LN≈5.8

In [\#](#), ABCD is not a parallelogram. ∠m is obtuse. Solve both
triangles. Round each answer to the nearest tenth.

<figure id="Figure_08_01_229">

</figure>

## Real-World Applications {#fs-id1165135390788}

A pole leans away from the sun at an angle of 7° to the vertical, as
shown in [\#](#). When the elevation of the sun is 55°, the pole casts a
shadow 42 feet long on the level ground. How long is the pole? Round the
answer to the nearest tenth.

<figure id="Figure_08_01_231">

</figure>

51.4 feet

To determine how far a boat is from shore, two radar stations 500 feet
apart find the angles out to the boat, as shown in [\#](#). Determine
the distance of the boat from station A and the distance of the boat
from shore. Round your answers to the nearest whole foot.

<figure id="Figure_08_01_232">

</figure>

[\#](#) shows a satellite orbiting Earth. The satellite passes directly
over two tracking stations A and B, which are 69 miles apart. When the
satellite is on one side of the two stations, the angles of elevation at
A and B are measured to be 83.9° and 86.2°, respectively. How far is the
satellite from station A and how high is the satellite above the ground?
Round answers to the nearest whole mile.

<figure id="Figure_08_01_233">

</figure>

The distance from the satellite to station A is approximately 1716
miles. The satellite is approximately 1706 miles above the ground.

A communications tower is located at the top of a steep hill, as shown
in [\#](#). The angle of inclination of the hill is 67°. A guy wire is
to be attached to the top of the tower and to the ground, 165 meters
downhill from the base of the tower. The angle formed by the guy wire
and the hill is 16°. Find the length of the cable required for the guy
wire to the nearest whole meter.

<figure id="Figure_08_01_234">

</figure>

The roof of a house is at a 20° angle. An 8-foot solar panel is to be
mounted on the roof and should be angled 38° relative to the horizontal
for optimal results. (See [\#](#)). How long does the vertical support
holding up the back of the panel need to be? Round to the nearest tenth.

<figure id="Figure_08_01_235">

</figure>

2.6 ft

Similar to an angle of elevation, an *angle of depression* is the acute
angle formed by a horizontal line and an observer's line of sight to an
object below the horizontal. A pilot is flying over a straight highway.
He determines the angles of depression to two mileposts, 6.6 km apart,
to be 37° and 44°, as shown in [\#](#). Find the distance of the plane
from point A to the nearest tenth of a kilometer.

<figure id="Figure_08_01_236">

</figure>

A pilot is flying over a straight highway. He determines the angles of
depression to two mileposts, 4.3 km apart, to be 32° and 56°, as shown
in [\#](#). Find the distance of the plane from point A to the nearest
tenth of a kilometer.

<figure id="Figure_08_01_237">

</figure>

5.6 km

In order to estimate the height of a building, two students stand at a
certain distance from the building at street level. From this point,
they find the angle of elevation from the street to the top of the
building to be 39°. They then move 300 feet closer to the building and
find the angle of elevation to be 50°. Assuming that the street is
level, estimate the height of the building to the nearest foot.

In order to estimate the height of a building, two students stand at a
certain distance from the building at street level. From this point,
they find the angle of elevation from the street to the top of the
building to be 35°. They then move 250 feet closer to the building and
find the angle of elevation to be 53°. Assuming that the street is
level, estimate the height of the building to the nearest foot.

371 ft

Points A and B are on opposite sides of a lake. Point C is 97 meters
from A. The measure of angle BAC is determined to be 101°, and the
measure of angle ACB is determined to be 53°. What is the distance from
A to B, rounded to the nearest whole meter?

A man and a woman standing 3 1 2 miles apart spot a hot air balloon at
the same time. If the angle of elevation from the man to the balloon is
27°, and the angle of elevation from the woman to the balloon is 41°,
find the altitude of the balloon to the nearest foot.

5936 ft

Two search teams spot a stranded climber on a mountain. The first search
team is 0.5 miles from the second search team, and both teams are at an
altitude of 1 mile. The angle of elevation from the first search team to
the stranded climber is 15°. The angle of elevation from the second
search team to the climber is 22°. What is the altitude of the climber?
Round to the nearest tenth of a mile.

A street light is mounted on a pole. A 6-foot-tall man is standing on
the street a short distance from the pole, casting a shadow. The angle
of elevation from the tip of the man's shadow to the top of his head of
28°. A 6-foot-tall woman is standing on the same street on the opposite
side of the pole from the man. The angle of elevation from the tip of
her shadow to the top of her head is 28°. If the man and woman are 20
feet apart, how far is the street light from the tip of the shadow of
each person? Round the distance to the nearest tenth of a foot.

24.1 ft

Three cities, A,B, and C, are located so that city A is due east of city
B. If city C is located 35° west of north from city B and is 100 miles
from city A and 70 miles from city B, how far is city A from city B?
Round the distance to the nearest tenth of a mile.

Two streets meet at an 80° angle. At the corner, a park is being built
in the shape of a triangle. Find the area of the park if, along one
road, the park measures 180 feet, and along the other road, the park
measures 215 feet.

19,056 ft2

Brian's house is on a corner lot. Find the area of the front yard if the
edges measure 40 and 56 feet, as shown in [\#](#).

<figure id="Figure_08_01_238">

</figure>

The Bermuda triangle is a region of the Atlantic Ocean that connects
Bermuda, Florida, and Puerto Rico. Find the area of the Bermuda triangle
if the distance from Florida to Bermuda is 1030 miles, the distance from
Puerto Rico to Bermuda is 980 miles, and the angle created by the two
distances is 62°.

445,624 square miles

A yield sign measures 30 inches on all three sides. What is the area of
the sign?

Naomi bought a dining table whose top is in the shape of a triangle.
Find the area of the table top if two of the sides measure 4 feet and
4.5 feet, and the smaller angles measure 32° and 42°, as shown in
[\#](#).

<figure id="Figure_08_01_239">

</figure>

8.65 ft2

# 

altitude

a perpendicular line from one vertex of a triangle to the opposite side,
or in the case of an obtuse triangle, to the line containing the
opposite side, forming two right triangles

ambiguous case

a scenario in which more than one triangle is a valid solution for a
given oblique SSA triangle

Law of Sines

states that the ratio of the measurement of one angle of a triangle to
the length of its opposite side is equal to the remaining two ratios of
angle measure to opposite side; any pair of proportions may be used to
solve for a missing angle or side

oblique triangle

any triangle that is not a right triangle
