m49405

> In this section, you will:
>
> Use the Law of Cosines to solve oblique triangles.
>
> Solve applied problems using the Law of Cosines.
>
> Use Heron's formula to ﬁnd the area of a triangle.

f59bb6c3-d618-4ba3-a4ab-97bd701e6957

Suppose a boat leaves port, travels 10 miles, turns 20 degrees, and
travels another 8 miles as shown in [\#](#). How far from port is the
boat?

<figure id="Figure_08_02_001">

</figure>

Unfortunately, while the Law of Sines enables us to address many
non-right triangle cases, it does not help us with triangles where the
known angle is between two known sides, a SAS (side-angle-side)
triangle, or when all three sides are known, but no angles are known, a
SSS (side-side-side) triangle. In this section, we will investigate
another tool for solving oblique triangles described by these last two
cases.

# Using the Law of Cosines to Solve Oblique Triangles {#fs-id1165135190782}

The tool we need to solve the problem of the boat's distance from the
port is the *Law of Cosines*, which defines the relationship among angle
measurements and side lengths in oblique triangles. Three formulas make
up the Law of Cosines. At first glance, the formulas may appear
complicated because they include many variables. However, once the
pattern is understood, the Law of Cosines is easier to work with than
most formulas at this mathematical level.

Understanding how the Law of Cosines is derived will be helpful in using
the formulas. The derivation begins with the Generalized Pythagorean
Theorem, which is an extension of the Pythagorean Theorem to non-right
triangles. Here is how it works: An arbitrary non-right triangle ABC is
placed in the coordinate plane with vertex A at the origin, side c drawn
along the *x*-axis, and vertex C located at some point ( x,y ) in the
plane, as illustrated in [\#](#). Generally, triangles exist anywhere in
the plane, but for this explanation we will place the triangle as noted.

<figure id="Figure_08_02_002">

</figure>

We can drop a perpendicular from C to the *x-*axis (this is the altitude
or height). Recalling the basic trigonometric identities, we know that

$$\cos\;\theta = \frac{x\text{(adjacent)}}{b\text{(hypotenuse)}}\text{~and~}\sin\;\theta = \frac{y\text{(opposite)}}{b\text{(hypotenuse)}}$$

In terms of θ,x=bcosθ and y=bsinθ. The (x,y) point located at C has
coordinates ( bcosθ, bsinθ ). Using the side ( x−c ) as one leg of a
right triangle and y as the second leg, we can find the length of
hypotenuse a using the Pythagorean Theorem. Thus,

$$\begin{array}{llllll}
{\mspace{9mu} a^{2} = {(x - c)}^{2} + y^{2}} & & & & & \\
{\text{~~~~~~~} = {(b\cos\;\theta - c)}^{2} + {(b\sin\;\theta)}^{2}} & & & & & {\text{Substitute~}(b\cos\;\theta)\text{~for}\; x\;\;\text{and~}(b\sin\;\theta)\;\text{for~}y.} \\
{\text{~~~~~~~} = \left( {b^{2}\cos^{2}\theta - 2bc\cos\;\theta + c^{2}} \right) + b^{2}\sin^{2}\theta} & & & & & {\text{Expand~the~perfect~square}.} \\
{\text{~~~~~~~} = b^{2}\cos^{2}\theta + b^{2}\sin^{2}\theta + c^{2} - 2bc\cos\;\theta} & & & & & {\text{Group~terms~noting~that~}\cos^{2}\theta + \sin^{2}\theta = 1.} \\
{\text{~~~~~~~} = b^{2}\left( {\cos^{2}\theta + \sin^{2}\theta} \right) + c^{2} - 2bc\cos\;\theta} & & & & & {\text{Factor~out~}b^{2}.} \\
{\mspace{9mu} a^{2} = b^{2} + c^{2} - 2bc\cos\;\theta} & & & & & 
\end{array}$$

The formula derived is one of the three equations of the Law of Cosines.
The other equations are found in a similar fashion.

Keep in mind that it is always helpful to sketch the triangle when
solving for angles or sides. In a real-world scenario, try to draw a
diagram of the situation. As more information emerges, the diagram may
have to be altered. Make those alterations to the diagram and, in the
end, the problem will be easier to solve.

:::: {#fs-id1165137641714 .note}
::: title
Law of Cosines
:::

The Law of Cosines states that the square of any side of a triangle is
equal to the sum of the squares of the other two sides minus twice the
product of the other two sides and the cosine of the included angle. For
triangles labeled as in [\#](#), with angles α,β, and γ, and opposite
corresponding sides a,b, and c, respectively, the Law of Cosines is
given as three equations.

$$\begin{array}{l}
{a^{2} = b^{2} + c^{2} - 2bc\;\;\cos\;\alpha} \\
{b^{2} = a^{2} + c^{2} - 2ac\;\;\cos\;\beta} \\
{c^{2} = a^{2} + b^{2} - 2ab\;\;\cos\;\gamma}
\end{array}$$

<figure id="Figure_08_02_003">

</figure>

To solve for a missing side measurement, the corresponding opposite
angle measure is needed.

When solving for an angle, the corresponding opposite side measure is
needed. We can use another version of the Law of Cosines to solve for an
angle.

$$\begin{array}{l}
 \\
\begin{array}{l}
\begin{array}{l}
 \\
{\cos\mspace{9mu}\alpha = \frac{b^{2} + c^{2} - a^{2}}{2bc}}
\end{array} \\
{\cos\mspace{9mu}\beta = \frac{a^{2} + c^{2} - b^{2}}{2ac}} \\
{\cos\mspace{9mu}\gamma = \frac{a^{2} + b^{2} - c^{2}}{2ab}}
\end{array}
\end{array}$$
::::

:::: {#fs-id1165135185939 .note}
::: title
:::

How To

*Given two sides and the angle between them (SAS), find the measures of
the remaining side and angles of a triangle.*

Sketch the triangle. Identify the measures of the known sides and
angles. Use variables to represent the measures of the unknown sides and
angles.

Apply the Law of Cosines to find the length of the unknown side or
angle.

Apply the

Law of Sines

or Cosines to find the measure of a second angle.

Compute the measure of the remaining angle.
::::

::: {#Example_08_02_01 .example}
Find the unknown side and angles of the triangle in [\#](#).

<figure id="Figure_08_02_004">

</figure>

First, make note of what is given: two sides and the angle between them.
This arrangement is classified as SAS and supplies the data needed to
apply the Law of Cosines.

Each one of the three laws of cosines begins with the square of an
unknown side opposite a known angle. For this example, the first side to
solve for is side b, as we know the measurement of the opposite angle β.

$$\begin{array}{ll}
{b^{2} = a^{2} + c^{2} - 2ac\cos\;\beta} & \\
{b^{2} = 10^{2} + 12^{2} - 2(10)(12)\cos(30^{\circ})\begin{array}{llll}
 & & & 
\end{array}} & {\text{Substitute~the~measurements~for~the~known~quantities}.} \\
{b^{2} = 100 + 144 - 240\left( \frac{\sqrt{3}}{2} \right)} & {\text{Evaluate~the~cosine~and~begin~to~simplify}.} \\
{b^{2} = 244 - 120\sqrt{3}} & \\
{b = \sqrt{244 - 120\sqrt{3}}} & {\text{Use~the~square~root~property}.} \\
{b \approx 6.013} & 
\end{array}$$

Because we are solving for a length, we use only the positive square
root. Now that we know the length b, we can use the Law of Sines to fill
in the remaining angles of the triangle. Solving for angle α, we have

$$\begin{array}{ll}
{\frac{\sin\;\alpha}{a} = \frac{\sin\;\beta}{b}} & \\
{\frac{\sin\;\alpha}{10} = \frac{\sin(30{^\circ})}{6.013}} & \\
{\sin\;\alpha = \frac{10\sin(30{^\circ})}{6.013}} & {\text{Multiply~both~sides~of~the~equation~by~10}.} \\
{\alpha = \sin^{- 1}\left( \frac{10\sin(30{^\circ})}{6.013} \right)\begin{array}{llll}
 & & & 
\end{array}} & {\text{Find~the~inverse~sine~of~}\frac{10\sin(30{^\circ})}{6.013}.} \\
{\alpha \approx 56.3{^\circ}} & 
\end{array}$$

The other possibility for α would be α=180°--56.3°≈123.7°. In the
original diagram, α is adjacent to the longest side, so α is an acute
angle and, therefore, 123.7° does not make sense. Notice that if we
choose to apply the Law of Cosines, we arrive at a unique answer. We do
not have to consider the other possibilities, as cosine is unique for
angles between 0° and 180°. Proceeding with α≈56.3°, we can then find
the third angle of the triangle.

$$\gamma = 180{^\circ} - 30{^\circ} - 56.3{^\circ} \approx 93.7{^\circ}$$

The complete set of angles and sides is

$$\begin{array}{ll}
{\alpha \approx 56.3{^\circ}\begin{array}{llll}
 & & & 
\end{array}} & {a = 10} \\
{\beta = 30{^\circ}} & {b \approx 6.013} \\
{\gamma \approx 93.7{^\circ}} & {c = 12}
\end{array}$$
:::

:::: {#fs-id1165137734372 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Find the missing side and angles of the given triangle: α=30°, b=12,
c=24.

a≈14.9, β≈23.8°, γ≈126.2°.
::::

::: {#Example_08_02_02 .example}
Find the angle α for the given triangle if side a=20, side b=25, and
side c=18.

For this example, we have no angles. We can solve for any angle using
the Law of Cosines. To solve for angle α, we have

$$\begin{array}{llll}
 & & & \\
{\text{~~~~~~~~~~~~~~}a^{2} = b^{2} + c^{2}-2bc\cos\;\alpha} & & & \\
{\text{~~~~~~~~~~~~~}20^{2} = 25^{2} + 18^{2}-2(25)(18)\cos\;\alpha} & & & {\text{Substitute~the~appropriate~measurements}.} \\
{\text{~~~~~~~~~~~~~}400 = 625 + 324 - 900\cos\;\alpha} & & & {\text{Simplify~in~each~step}.} \\
{\text{~~~~~~~~~~~~~}400 = 949 - 900\cos\;\alpha} & & & \\
{\text{~~~~~~~~~~}-549 = -900\cos\;\alpha} & & & {\text{Isolate~cos~}\alpha.} \\
{\text{~~~~~~~~~~}\frac{-549}{-900} = \cos\;\alpha} & & & \\
{\text{~~~~~~~~~~~}0.61 \approx \cos\;\alpha} & & & \\
{\cos^{-1}(0.61) \approx \alpha} & & & {\text{Find~the~inverse~cosine}.} \\
{\text{~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~}\alpha \approx 52.4{^\circ}} & & & 
\end{array}$$

See [\#](#).

<figure id="Figure_08_02_005">

</figure>

Because the inverse cosine can return any angle between 0 and 180
degrees, there will not be any ambiguous cases using this method.
:::

:::: {#fs-id1165137605779 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Given a=5,b=7, and c=10, find the missing angles.

α≈27.7°, β≈40.5°, γ≈111.8°
::::

# Solving Applied Problems Using the Law of Cosines {#fs-id1165133215477}

Just as the Law of Sines provided the appropriate equations to solve a
number of applications, the Law of Cosines is applicable to situations
in which the given data fits the cosine models. We may see these in the
fields of navigation, surveying, astronomy, and geometry, just to name a
few.

::: {#Example_08_02_03 .example}
On many cell phones with GPS, an approximate location can be given
before the GPS signal is received. This is accomplished through a
process called triangulation, which works by using the distances from
two known points. Suppose there are two cell phone towers within range
of a cell phone. The two towers are located 6000 feet apart along a
straight highway, running east to west, and the cell phone is north of
the highway. Based on the signal delay, it can be determined that the
signal is 5,050 feet from the first tower and 2,420 feet from the second
tower. Determine the position of the cell phone north and east of the
first tower, and determine how far it is from the highway.

For simplicity, we start by drawing a diagram similar to [\#](#) and
labeling our given information.

<figure id="Figure_08_02_006">

</figure>

Using the Law of Cosines, we can solve for the angle θ. Remember that
the Law of Cosines uses the square of one side to find the cosine of the
opposite angle. For this example, let a=2,420,b=5,050, and c=6,000.
Thus, θ corresponds to the opposite side a=2,420.

$$\begin{matrix}
a^{2} & = & {b^{2} + c^{2} - 2bc~\cos\theta} \\
{(2,420)}^{2} & = & {{(5,050)}^{2} + {(6,000)}^{2} - 2(5,050)(6,000)~\cos\theta} \\
\begin{matrix}
{(2,420)}^{2} & - & {{(5,050)}^{2} - {(6,000)}^{2}}
\end{matrix} & = & {- 2(5,050)(6,000)~\cos\theta} \\
\frac{\begin{matrix}
{(2,420)}^{2} & - & {{(5,050)}^{2} - {(6,000)}^{2}}
\end{matrix}}{- 2(5,050)(6,000)} & = & {\cos\theta} \\
{\cos\theta} & \approx & {0.9183} \\
\theta & \approx & {\cos^{- 1}(0.9183)} \\
\theta & \approx & {23.3{^\circ}}
\end{matrix}$$

To answer the questions about the phone's position north and east of the
tower, and the distance to the highway, drop a perpendicular from the
position of the cell phone, as in [\#](#). This forms two right
triangles, although we only need the right triangle that includes the
first tower for this problem.

<figure id="Figure_08_02_007">

</figure>

Using the angle θ= 23.3° and the basic trigonometric identities, we can
find the solutions. Thus

$$\begin{array}{l}
\begin{array}{l}
 \\
{\mspace{9mu}\;\;\;\;\;\;\cos(23.3{^\circ}) = \frac{x}{5,050}}
\end{array} \\
{\text{~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~}x = 5,050\cos(23.3{^\circ})} \\
{\text{~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~}x \approx 4,638.15\;\text{feet}} \\
{\mspace{9mu}\text{~~}\sin(23.3{^\circ}) = \frac{y}{5,050}} \\
{\text{~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~}y = 5,050\sin(23.3{^\circ})} \\
{\text{~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~}y \approx 1,997.5\;\text{feet}} \\

\end{array}$$

The cell phone is approximately 4,638 feet east and 1998 feet north of
the first tower, and 1998 feet from the highway.
:::

::: {#Example_08_02_04 .example}
Returning to our problem at the beginning of this section, suppose a
boat leaves port, travels 10 miles, turns 20 degrees, and travels
another 8 miles. How far from port is the boat? The diagram is repeated
here in [\#](#).

<figure id="Figure_08_02_009">

</figure>

The boat turned 20 degrees, so the obtuse angle of the non-right
triangle is the supplemental angle, 180°−20°=160°. With this, we can
utilize the Law of Cosines to find the missing side of the obtuse
triangle---the distance of the boat to the port.

$$\begin{array}{l}
{x^{2} = 8^{2} + 10^{2} - 2(8)(10)\cos(160{^\circ})} \\
{x^{2} = 314.35} \\
{x = \sqrt{314.35}} \\
{x \approx 17.7\;\text{miles}}
\end{array}$$

The boat is about 17.7 miles from port.
:::

# Using Heron's Formula to Find the Area of a Triangle {#fs-id1165135650686}

We already learned how to find the area of an oblique triangle when we
know two sides and an angle. We also know the formula to find the area
of a triangle using the base and the height. When we know the three
sides, however, we can use Heron's formula instead of finding the
height. Heron of Alexandria was a geometer who lived during the first
century A.D. He discovered a formula for finding the area of oblique
triangles when three sides are known.

:::: {#fs-id1165133306825 .note}
::: title
Heron's Formula
:::

Heron's formula finds the area of oblique triangles in which sides a,b,
and c are known.

$$\text{Area} = \sqrt{s\left( {s - a} \right)\left( {s - b} \right)\left( {s - c} \right)}$$

where s= ( a+b+c ) 2 is one half of the perimeter of the triangle,
sometimes called the semi-perimeter.
::::

::: {#Example_08_02_05 .example}
Find the area of the triangle in [\#](#) using Heron's formula.

<figure id="Figure_08_02_010">

</figure>

First, we calculate s.

$$\begin{array}{l}
{s = \frac{(a + b + c)}{2}} \\
{s = \frac{(10 + 15 + 7)}{2} = 16}
\end{array}$$

Then we apply the formula.

$$\begin{array}{l}
{\text{Area} = \sqrt{s(s - a)(s - b)(s - c)}} \\
{\text{Area} = \sqrt{16(16 - 10)(16 - 15)(16 - 7)}} \\
{\text{Area} \approx 29.4}
\end{array}$$

The area is approximately 29.4 square units.
:::

:::: {#fs-id1165134547309 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Use Heron's formula to find the area of a triangle with sides of lengths
a=29.7ft,b=42.3ft, and c=38.4ft.

Area = 552 square feet
::::

::: {#Example_08_02_06 .example}
A Chicago city developer wants to construct a building consisting of
artist's lofts on a triangular lot bordered by Rush Street, Wabash
Avenue, and Pearson Street. The frontage along Rush Street is
approximately 62.4 meters, along Wabash Avenue it is approximately 43.5
meters, and along Pearson Street it is approximately 34.1 meters. How
many square meters are available to the developer? See [\#](#) for a
view of the city property.

<figure id="Figure_08_02_011">

</figure>

Find the measurement for s, which is one-half of the perimeter.

$$\begin{array}{l}
{s = \frac{(62.4 + 43.5 + 34.1)}{2}} \\
{s = 70\;\text{m}}
\end{array}$$

Apply Heron's formula.

$$\begin{array}{l}
{\text{Area} = \sqrt{70(70 - 62.4)(70 - 43.5)(70 - 34.1)}} \\
{\text{Area} = \sqrt{506,118.2}} \\
{\text{Area} \approx 711.4}
\end{array}$$

The developer has about 711.4 square meters.
:::

:::: {#fs-id1165135497741 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Find the area of a triangle given a=4.38ft,b=3.79ft, and c=5.22ft.

about 8.15 square feet
::::

:::: {#fs-id1165135532502 .note}
::: title
:::

Media

Access these online resources for additional instruction and practice
with the Law of Cosines.

Law of Cosines

Law of Cosines: Applications

Law of Cosines: Applications 2
::::

# Key Equations {#fs-id1165135349445}

  ----------------- ----------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Law of Cosines    a 2 = b 2 + c 2 −2bccosα b 2 = a 2 + c 2 −2accosβ c 2 = a 2 + b 2 −2abcosγ
  Heron's formula   Area= s(s−a)(s−b)(s−c) where s= (a+b+c) 2
  ----------------- ----------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Key Concepts {#fs-id1165135442379}

The Law of Cosines defines the relationship among angle measurements and
lengths of sides in oblique triangles.

The Generalized Pythagorean Theorem is the Law of Cosines for two cases
of oblique triangles: SAS and SSS. Dropping an imaginary perpendicular
splits the oblique triangle into two right triangles or forms one right
triangle, which allows sides to be related and measurements to be
calculated. See

and

.

The Law of Cosines is useful for many types of applied problems. The
first step in solving such problems is generally to draw a sketch of the
problem presented. If the information given fits one of the three models
(the three equations), then apply the Law of Cosines to find a solution.
See

and

.

Heron's formula allows the calculation of area in oblique triangles. All
three sides must be known to apply Heron's formula. See

and See

.

# Section Exercises {#fs-id1165134212020}

## Verbal {#fs-id1165134212023}

If you are looking for a missing side of a triangle, what do you need to
know when using the Law of Cosines?

two sides and the angle opposite the missing side.

If you are looking for a missing angle of a triangle, what do you need
to know when using the Law of Cosines?

Explain what s represents in Heron's formula.

s is the semi-perimeter, which is half the perimeter of the triangle.

Explain the relationship between the Pythagorean Theorem and the Law of
Cosines.

When must you use the Law of Cosines instead of the Pythagorean Theorem?

The Law of Cosines must be used for any oblique (non-right) triangle.

## Algebraic {#fs-id1165135518110}

For the following exercises, assume α is opposite side a,β is opposite
side b, and γ is opposite side c. If possible, solve each triangle for
the unknown side. Round to the nearest tenth.

γ=41.2°,a=2.49,b=3.13

α=120°,b=6,c=7

11.3

β=58.7°,a=10.6,c=15.7

γ=115°,a=18,b=23

34.7

α=119°,a=26,b=14

γ=113°,b=10,c=32

26.7

β=67°,a=49,b=38

α=43.1°,a=184.2,b=242.8

c=257.3,96.7

α=36.6°,a=186.2,b=242.2

β= 50° ,a=105,b=45

not possible

For the following exercises, use the Law of Cosines to solve for the
missing angle of the oblique triangle. Round to the nearest tenth.

a=42,b=19,c=30; find angle A.

a=14,b=13,c=20; find angle C.

95.5°

a=16,b=31,c=20; find angle B.

a=13,b=22,c=28; find angle A.

26.9°

a=108,b=132,c=160; find angle C.

For the following exercises, solve the triangle. Round to the nearest
tenth.

A=35°,b=8,c=11

B≈45.9°,C≈99.1°,a≈6.4

B=88°,a=4.4,c=5.2

C=121°,a=21,b=37

A≈20.6°,B≈38.4°,c≈51.1

a=13,b=11,c=15

a=3.1,b=3.5,c=5

A≈37.8°,B≈43.8,C≈98.4°

a=51,b=25,c=29

For the following exercises, use Heron's formula to find the area of the
triangle. Round to the nearest hundredth.

Find the area of a triangle with sides of length 18 in, 21 in, and 32
in. Round to the nearest tenth.

177.56 in2

Find the area of a triangle with sides of length 20 cm, 26 cm, and 37
cm. Round to the nearest tenth.

a= 1 2 m,b= 1 3 m,c= 1 4 m

0.04 m2

a=12.4 ft,b=13.7 ft,c=20.2 ft

a=1.6 yd,b=2.6 yd,c=4.1 yd

0.91 yd2

## Graphical {#fs-id1165131880282}

For the following exercises, find the length of side x. Round to the
nearest tenth.

3.0

29.1

0.5

For the following exercises, find the measurement of angle A.

70.7°

77.4°

Find the measure of each angle in the triangle shown in [\#](#). Round
to the nearest tenth.

<figure id="Figure_08_02_211">

</figure>

For the following exercises, solve for the unknown side. Round to the
nearest tenth.

25.0

9.3

For the following exercises, find the area of the triangle. Round to the
nearest hundredth.

43.52

1.41

0.14

## Extensions {#fs-id1165134391071}

A parallelogram has sides of length 16 units and 10 units. The shorter
diagonal is 12 units. Find the measure of the longer diagonal.

The sides of a parallelogram are 11 feet and 17 feet. The longer
diagonal is 22 feet. Find the length of the shorter diagonal.

18.3

The sides of a parallelogram are 28 centimeters and 40 centimeters. The
measure of the larger angle is 100°. Find the length of the shorter
diagonal.

A regular octagon is inscribed in a circle with a radius of 8 inches.
(See [\#](#).) Find the perimeter of the octagon.

<figure id="Figure_08_02_221">

</figure>

48.98

A regular pentagon is inscribed in a circle of radius 12 cm. (See
[\#](#).) Find the perimeter of the pentagon. Round to the nearest tenth
of a centimeter.

<figure id="Figure_08_02_222">

</figure>

For the following exercises, suppose that x 2 =25+36−60cos( 52 )
represents the relationship of three sides of a triangle and the cosine
of an angle.

Draw the triangle.

Find the length of the third side.

For the following exercises, find the area of the triangle.

7.62

85.1

## Real-World Applications {#fs-id1165135633919}

A surveyor has taken the measurements shown in [\#](#). Find the
distance across the lake. Round answers to the nearest tenth.

<figure id="Figure_08_02_227">

</figure>

A satellite calculates the distances and angle shown in [\#](#) (not to
scale). Find the distance between the two cities. Round answers to the
nearest tenth.

<figure id="Figure_08_02_228">

</figure>

24.0 km

An airplane flies 220 miles with a heading of 40°, and then flies 180
miles with a heading of 170°. How far is the plane from its starting
point, and at what heading? Round answers to the nearest tenth.

A 113-foot tower is located on a hill that is inclined 34° to the
horizontal, as shown in [\#](#). A guy-wire is to be attached to the top
of the tower and anchored at a point 98 feet uphill from the base of the
tower. Find the length of wire needed.

<figure id="Figure_08_02_230">

</figure>

99.9 ft

Two ships left a port at the same time. One ship traveled at a speed of
18 miles per hour at a heading of 320°. The other ship traveled at a
speed of 22 miles per hour at a heading of 194°. Find the distance
between the two ships after 10 hours of travel.

The graph in [\#](#) represents two boats departing at the same time
from the same dock. The first boat is traveling at 18 miles per hour at
a heading of 327° and the second boat is traveling at 4 miles per hour
at a heading of 60°. Find the distance between the two boats after 2
hours.

<figure id="Figure_08_02_231">

</figure>

37.3 miles

A triangular swimming pool measures 40 feet on one side and 65 feet on
another side. These sides form an angle that measures 50°. How long is
the third side (to the nearest tenth)?

A pilot flies in a straight path for 1 hour 30 min. She then makes a
course correction, heading 10° to the right of her original course, and
flies 2 hours in the new direction. If she maintains a constant speed of
680 miles per hour, how far is she from her starting position?

2371 miles

Los Angeles is 1,744 miles from Chicago, Chicago is 714 miles from New
York, and New York is 2,451 miles from Los Angeles. Draw a triangle
connecting these three cities, and find the angles in the triangle.

Philadelphia is 140 miles from Washington, D.C., Washington, D.C. is 442
miles from Boston, and Boston is 315 miles from Philadelphia. Draw a
triangle connecting these three cities and find the angles in the
triangle.

Two planes leave the same airport at the same time. One flies at 20°
east of north at 500 miles per hour. The second flies at 30° east of
south at 600 miles per hour. How far apart are the planes after 2 hours?

Two airplanes take off in different directions. One travels 300 mph due
west and the other travels 25° north of west at 420 mph. After 90
minutes, how far apart are they, assuming they are flying at the same
altitude?

292.4 miles

A parallelogram has sides of length 15.4 units and 9.8 units. Its area
is 72.9 square units. Find the measure of the longer diagonal.

The four sequential sides of a quadrilateral have lengths 4.5 cm, 7.9
cm, 9.4 cm, and 12.9 cm. The angle between the two smallest sides is
117°. What is the area of this quadrilateral?

65.4 cm2

The four sequential sides of a quadrilateral have lengths 5.7 cm, 7.2
cm, 9.4 cm, and 12.8 cm. The angle between the two smallest sides is
106°. What is the area of this quadrilateral?

Find the area of a triangular piece of land that measures 30 feet on one
side and 42 feet on another; the included angle measures 132°. Round to
the nearest whole square foot.

468 ft2

Find the area of a triangular piece of land that measures 110 feet on
one side and 250 feet on another; the included angle measures 85°. Round
to the nearest whole square foot.

# 

Law of Cosines

states that the square of any side of a triangle is equal to the sum of
the squares of the other two sides minus twice the product of the other
two sides and the cosine of the included angle

Generalized Pythagorean Theorem

an extension of the Law of Cosines; relates the sides of an oblique
triangle and is used for SAS and SSS triangles
