m49406

> In this section, you will:
>
> Plot points using polar coordinates.
>
> Convert from polar coordinates to rectangular coordinates.
>
> Convert from rectangular coordinates to polar coordinates.
>
> Transform equations between polar and rectangular forms.
>
> Identify and graph polar equations by converting to rectangular
> equations.

c1e7a952-2a95-4202-b38b-126d1ea832fb

Over 12 kilometers from port, a sailboat encounters rough weather and is
blown off course by a 16-knot wind (see [\#](#)). How can the sailor
indicate his location to the Coast Guard? In this section, we will
investigate a method of representing location that is different from a
standard coordinate grid.

<figure id="Figure_08_03_001">

</figure>

# Plotting Points Using Polar Coordinates {#fs-id1165135551681}

When we think about plotting points in the plane, we usually think of
rectangular coordinates ( x,y ) in the Cartesian coordinate plane.
However, there are other ways of writing a coordinate pair and other
types of grid systems. In this section, we introduce to polar
coordinates, which are points labeled ( r,θ ) and plotted on a polar
grid. The polar grid is represented as a series of concentric circles
radiating out from the pole, or the origin of the coordinate plane.

The polar grid is scaled as the unit circle with the positive *x-*axis
now viewed as the polar axis and the origin as the pole. The first
coordinate r is the radius or length of the directed line segment from
the pole. The angle θ, measured in radians, indicates the direction of
r. We move counterclockwise from the polar axis by an angle of θ, and
measure a directed line segment the length of r in the direction of θ.
Even though we measure θ first and then r, the polar point is written
with the *r*-coordinate first. For example, to plot the point ( 2, π 4
), we would move π 4 units in the counterclockwise direction and then a
length of 2 from the pole. This point is plotted on the grid in [\#](#).

<figure id="Figure_08_03_002">

</figure>

::: {#Example_08_03_01 .example}
Plot the point ( 3, π 2 ) on the polar grid.

The angle π 2 is found by sweeping in a counterclockwise direction 90°
from the polar axis. The point is located at a length of 3 units from
the pole in the π 2 direction, as shown in [\#](#).

<figure id="Figure_08_03_003">

</figure>
:::

:::: {#fs-id1165137704675 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Plot the point ( 2, π 3 ) in the polar grid.
::::

::: {#Example_08_03_02 .example}
Plot the point ( −2, π 6 ) on the polar grid.

We know that π 6 is located in the first quadrant. However, r=−2. We can
approach plotting a point with a negative r in two ways:

Plot the point

(

2

,

π

6

)

by moving

π

6

in the counterclockwise direction and extending a directed line segment
2 units into the first quadrant. Then retrace the directed line segment
back through the pole, and continue 2 units into the third quadrant;

Move

π

6

in the counterclockwise direction, and draw the directed line segment
from the pole 2 units in the negative direction, into the third
quadrant.

See [\#](#)(a). Compare this to the graph of the polar coordinate ( 2, π
6 ) shown in [\#](#)(b).

<figure id="Figure_08_03_005">

</figure>
:::

:::: {#fs-id1165137723371 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Plot the points ( 3,− π 6 ) and ( 2, 9π 4 ) on the same polar grid.
::::

# Converting from Polar Coordinates to Rectangular Coordinates {#fs-id1165134149808}

When given a set of polar coordinates, we may need to convert them to
rectangular coordinates. To do so, we can recall the relationships that
exist among the variables x,y,r, and θ.

$$\begin{array}{l}
\begin{array}{l}
 \\
{\cos\;\theta = \frac{x}{r}\rightarrow x = r\cos\;\theta}
\end{array} \\
{\sin\;\theta = \frac{y}{r}\rightarrow y = r\sin\;\theta}
\end{array}$$

Dropping a perpendicular from the point in the plane to the *x-*axis
forms a right triangle, as illustrated in [\#](#). An easy way to
remember the equations above is to think of cosθ as the adjacent side
over the hypotenuse and sinθ as the opposite side over the hypotenuse.

<figure id="Figure_08_03_007">

</figure>

:::: {#fs-id1165134105991 .note}
::: title
Converting from Polar Coordinates to Rectangular Coordinates
:::

To convert polar coordinates ( r,θ ) to rectangular coordinates ( x,y ),
let

$$\cos\;\theta = \frac{x}{r}\rightarrow x = r\cos\;\theta$$

$$\sin\;\theta = \frac{y}{r}\rightarrow y = r\sin\;\theta$$
::::

:::: {#fs-id1165131880216 .note}
::: title
:::

How To

*Given polar coordinates, convert to rectangular coordinates.*

Given the polar coordinate

(

r

,

θ

)

,

write

x

=

r

cos

θ

and

y

=

r

sin

θ

.

Evaluate

cos

θ

and

sin

θ

.

Multiply

cos

θ

by

r

to find the

x-

coordinate of the rectangular form.

Multiply

sin

θ

by

r

to find the

y-

coordinate of the rectangular form.
::::

::: {#Example_08_03_03 .example}
Write the polar coordinates ( 3, π 2 ) as rectangular coordinates.

Use the equivalent relationships.

$$\begin{array}{l}
{x = r\cos\;\theta} \\
{x = 3\cos\;\frac{\pi}{2} = 0} \\
{y = r\sin\;\theta} \\
{y = 3\sin\;\frac{\pi}{2} = 3}
\end{array}$$

The rectangular coordinates are ( 0,3 ). See [\#](#).

<figure id="Figure_08_03_008">

</figure>
:::

::: {#Example_08_03_04 .example}
Write the polar coordinates ( −2,0 ) as rectangular coordinates.

See [\#](#). Writing the polar coordinates as rectangular, we have

$$\begin{array}{l}
{x = r\cos\;\theta} \\
{x = -2\cos(0) = -2} \\
 \\
{y = r\sin\;\theta} \\
{y = -2\sin(0) = 0}
\end{array}$$

The rectangular coordinates are also ( −2,0 ).

<figure id="Figure_08_03_009">

</figure>
:::

:::: {#fs-id1165134489724 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Write the polar coordinates ( −1, 2π 3 ) as rectangular coordinates.

( x,y )=( 1 2 ,− 3 2 )
::::

# Converting from Rectangular Coordinates to Polar Coordinates {#fs-id1165134319712}

To convert rectangular coordinates to polar coordinates, we will use two
other familiar relationships. With this conversion, however, we need to
be aware that a set of rectangular coordinates will yield more than one
polar point.

:::: {#fs-id1165135551669 .note}
::: title
Converting from Rectangular Coordinates to Polar Coordinates
:::

Converting from rectangular coordinates to polar coordinates requires
the use of one or more of the relationships illustrated in [\#](#).

$$\begin{array}{l}
{\cos\;\theta = \frac{x}{r}~{or}~x = r\cos\;\theta} \\
{\sin\;\theta = \frac{y}{r}\mspace{9mu}\text{~or}\mspace{9mu} y = r\sin\;\theta} \\
{r^{2} = x^{2} + y^{2}} \\
{\tan\;\theta = \frac{y}{x}}
\end{array}$$

<figure id="Figure_08_03_010">

</figure>
::::

::: {#Example_08_03_05 .example}
Convert the rectangular coordinates ( 3,3 ) to polar coordinates.

We see that the original point ( 3,3 ) is in the first quadrant. To find
θ, use the formula tanθ= y x . This gives

$$\begin{array}{l}
{\tan\;\theta = \frac{3}{3}} \\
{\tan\;\theta = 1} \\
{\theta = \tan^{-1}(1)} \\
{\theta = \frac{\pi}{4}}
\end{array}$$

To find r, we substitute the values for x and y into the formula r= x
2 + y 2 . We know that r must be positive, as π 4 is in the first
quadrant. Thus

$$\begin{array}{l}
{r = \sqrt{3^{2} + 3^{2}}} \\
{r = \sqrt{9 + 9}} \\
{r = \sqrt{18} = 3\sqrt{2}}
\end{array}$$

So, r=3 2 and θ= π 4 , giving us the polar point ( 3 2 , π 4 ). See
[\#](#).

<figure id="Figure_08_03_011">

</figure>

There are other sets of polar coordinates that will be the same as our
first solution. For example, the points ( −3 2 , 5π 4 ) and ( 3 2 ,− 7π
4 ) will coincide with the original solution of ( 3 2 , π 4 ). The point
( −3 2 , 5π 4 ) indicates a move further counterclockwise by π, which is
directly opposite π 4 . The radius is expressed as −3 2 . However, the
angle 5π 4 is located in the third quadrant and, as r is negative, we
extend the directed line segment in the opposite direction, into the
first quadrant. This is the same point as ( 3 2 , π 4 ). The point ( 3 2
,− 7π 4 ) is a move further clockwise by − 7π 4 , from π 4 . The radius,
3 2 , is the same.
:::

# Transforming Equations between Polar and Rectangular Forms {#fs-id1165132957131}

We can now convert coordinates between polar and rectangular form.
Converting equations can be more difficult, but it can be beneficial to
be able to convert between the two forms. Since there are a number of
polar equations that cannot be expressed clearly in Cartesian form, and
vice versa, we can use the same procedures we used to convert points
between the coordinate systems. We can then use a graphing calculator to
graph either the rectangular form or the polar form of the equation.

:::: {#fs-id1165133356035 .note}
::: title
:::

How To

*Given an equation in polar form, graph it using a graphing calculator.*

Change the

MODE

to

POL

, representing polar form.

Press the

Y=

button to bring up a screen allowing the input of six equations:

r

1

,

r

2

,

.

.

.

,

r

6

.

Enter the polar equation, set equal to

r

.

Press

GRAPH

.
::::

::: {#Example_08_03_06 .example}
Write the Cartesian equation x 2 + y 2 =9 in polar form.

The goal is to eliminate x and y from the equation and introduce r and
θ. Ideally, we would write the equation r as a function of θ. To obtain
the polar form, we will use the relationships between ( x,y ) and ( r,θ
). Since x=rcosθ and y=rsinθ, we can substitute and solve for r.

$$\begin{array}{ll}
{\text{~~~}{(r\cos\;\theta)}^{2} + {(r\sin\;\theta)}^{2} = 9} & \\
{\text{~~~}r^{2}\cos^{2}\theta + r^{2}\sin^{2}\theta = 9} & \\
{r^{2}(\cos^{2}\theta + \sin^{2}\theta) = 9} & \\
{r^{2}(1) = 9} & {\text{Substitute~cos}^{2}\theta + \sin^{2}\theta = 1.} \\
{\text{~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~}r = \pm 3\begin{array}{llll}
 & & & 
\end{array}} & {\text{Use~the~square~root~property}.}
\end{array}$$

Thus, x 2 + y 2 =9,r=3, and r=−3 should generate the same graph. See
[\#](#).

<figure id="Figure_08_03_016">

</figure>

To graph a circle in rectangular form, we must first solve for y.

$$\begin{array}{l}
\begin{array}{l}
 \\
{x^{2} + y^{2} = 9}
\end{array} \\
{\text{~~~~~~~~}y^{2} = 9 - x^{2}} \\
{\text{~~~~~~~~~~}y = \pm \sqrt{9 - x^{2}}}
\end{array}$$

Note that this is two separate functions, since a circle fails the
vertical line test. Therefore, we need to enter the positive and
negative square roots into the calculator separately, as two equations
in the form Y 1 = 9− x 2 and Y 2 =− 9− x 2 . Press *GRAPH.*
:::

::: {#Example_08_03_07 .example}
Rewrite the Cartesian equation x 2 + y 2 =6y as a polar equation.

This equation appears similar to the previous example, but it requires
different steps to convert the equation.

We can still follow the same procedures we have already learned and make
the following substitutions:

$$\begin{array}{ll}
{r^{2} = 6y} & {\text{Use~}x^{2} + y^{2} = r^{2}.} \\
{r^{2} = 6r\sin\;\theta} & {\text{Substitute}\; y = r\sin\;\theta.} \\
{r^{2} - 6r\sin\;\theta = 0} & {\text{Set~equal~to~0}.} \\
{r(r - 6\sin\;\theta) = 0} & {\text{Factor~and~solve}.} \\
{r = 0} & {\text{We~reject~}r = 0,\mspace{9mu}\text{as~it~only~represents~one~point,~}(0,0).} \\
{r = 6\sin\;\theta\begin{array}{llll}
 & & & 
\end{array}} & 
\end{array}$$

Therefore, the equations x 2 + y 2 =6y and r=6sinθ should give us the
same graph. See [\#](#).

<figure id="Figure_08_03_012">

</figure>

The Cartesian or rectangular equation is plotted on the rectangular
grid, and the polar equation is plotted on the polar grid. Clearly, the
graphs are identical.
:::

::: {#Example_08_03_08 .example}
Rewrite the Cartesian equation y=3x+2 as a polar equation.

We will use the relationships x=rcosθ and y=rsinθ.

$$\begin{array}{ll}
{\text{~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~}y = 3x + 2} & \\
{\text{~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~}r\sin\;\theta = 3r\cos\;\theta + 2} & \\
{r\sin\;\theta - 3r\cos\;\theta = 2} & \\
{r(\sin\;\theta - 3\cos\;\theta) = 2} & {\text{Isolate~}r.} \\
{r = \frac{2}{\sin\;\theta - 3\cos\;\theta}\begin{array}{llll}
 & & & 
\end{array}} & {\text{Solve~for~}r.}
\end{array}$$
:::

:::: {#fs-id1165134496398 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Rewrite the Cartesian equation y 2 =3− x 2 in polar form.

r= 3
::::

# Identify and Graph Polar Equations by Converting to Rectangular Equations {#fs-id1165137422423}

We have learned how to convert rectangular coordinates to polar
coordinates, and we have seen that the points are indeed the same. We
have also transformed polar equations to rectangular equations and vice
versa. Now we will demonstrate that their graphs, while drawn on
different grids, are identical.

::: {#Example_08_03_09 .example}
Covert the polar equation r=2secθ to a rectangular equation, and draw
its corresponding graph.

The conversion is

$$\begin{matrix}
r & = & {2\sec\;\theta} \\
r & = & \frac{2}{\cos\;\theta} \\
{r\;\cos\;\theta} & = & 2 \\
x & = & 2
\end{matrix}$$

Notice that the equation r=2secθ drawn on the polar grid is clearly the
same as the vertical line x=2 drawn on the rectangular grid (see
[\#](#)). Just as x=c is the standard form for a vertical line in
rectangular form, r=csecθ is the standard form for a vertical line in
polar form.

<figure id="Figure_08_03_013">

</figure>

A similar discussion would demonstrate that the graph of the function
r=2cscθ will be the horizontal line y=2. In fact, r=ccscθ is the
standard form for a horizontal line in polar form, corresponding to the
rectangular form y=c.
:::

::: {#Example_08_03_10 .example}
Rewrite the polar equation r= 3 1−2cosθ as a Cartesian equation.

The goal is to eliminate θ and r, and introduce x and y. We clear the
fraction, and then use substitution. In order to replace r with x and y,
we must use the expression x 2 + y 2 = r 2 .

$$\begin{matrix}
r & = & \frac{3}{1 - 2\;\cos\;\theta} & \\
{r\left( 1 - 2\left( \frac{x}{r} \right) \right)} & = & 3 & \\
{r - 2x} & = & 3 & {\text{Use}\;\cos\;\theta = \frac{x}{r}\; to\;\text{eliminate}\;\theta} \\
{r - 2x} & = & 3 & \\
r & = & {3 + 2x} & {\text{Isolate}\; r} \\
r^{2} & = & (3 + 2x)^{2} & {\text{Square}\;\text{both}\;\text{sides}} \\
{x^{2} + y^{2}} & = & (3 + 2x)^{2} & {\text{Use}\; x^{2} + y^{2} = r^{2}}
\end{matrix}$$

The Cartesian equation is x 2 + y 2 = ( 3+2x ) 2 . However, to graph it,
especially using a graphing calculator or computer program, we want to
isolate y.

$$\begin{array}{l}
{x^{2} + y^{2} = \left( {3 + 2x} \right)^{2}} \\
{\text{~~~~~~~~}y^{2} = \left( {3 + 2x} \right)^{2} - x^{2}} \\
{\text{~~~~~~~~~~}y = \pm \sqrt{\left( {3 + 2x} \right)^{2} - x^{2}}}
\end{array}$$

When our entire equation has been changed from r and θ to x and y, we
can stop, unless asked to solve for y or simplify. See [\#](#).

<figure id="Figure_08_03_015">

</figure>

The "hour-glass" shape of the graph is called a *hyperbola*. Hyperbolas
have many interesting geometric features and applications, which we will
investigate further in [Analytic Geometry](#).

In this example, the right side of the equation can be expanded and the
equation simplified further, as shown above. However, the equation
cannot be written as a single function in Cartesian form. We may wish to
write the rectangular equation in the hyperbola's standard form. To do
this, we can start with the initial equation.

$$\begin{matrix}
{x^{2} + y^{2}} & = & (3 + 2x)^{2} & \\
{x^{2} + y^{2} - (3 + 2x)^{2}} & = & 0 & \\
{x^{2} + y^{2} - \left( 9 + 12x + 4x^{2} \right)} & = & 0 & \\
{x^{2} + y^{2} - 9 - 12x - 4x^{2}} & = & 0 & \\
{- 3x^{2} - 12x + y^{2}} & = & 9 & {\text{Multiply}\;\text{through}\;\text{by}\; - 1} \\
{3x^{2} + 12x - y^{2}} & = & {- 9} & \\
{3\left( x^{2} + 4x + \right) - y^{2}} & = & {- 9} & \\
{3\left( x^{2} + 4x + 4 \right) - y^{2}} & = & {- 9 + 12} & {Organize\;\text{terms}\;\text{to}\;\text{complete}\;\text{the}\;\text{square}\;\text{for}\; x} \\
{3(x + 2)^{2} - y^{2}} & = & 3 & \\
{(x + 2)^{2} - \frac{y^{2}}{3}} & = & 1 & 
\end{matrix}$$
:::

:::: {#fs-id1165133074971 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Rewrite the polar equation r=2sinθ in Cartesian form.

x 2 + y 2 =2y or, in the standard form for a circle, x 2 + ( y−1 ) 2 =1
::::

::: {#Example_08_03_11 .example}
Rewrite the polar equation r=sin( 2θ ) in Cartesian form.

$$\begin{array}{ll}
{\text{~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~}r = \sin(2\theta)} & {\text{Use~the~double~angle~identity~for~sine}.} \\
{\text{~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~}r = 2\sin\;\theta\cos\;\theta\begin{array}{llll}
 & & & 
\end{array}} & {\text{Use~}\cos\;\theta = \frac{x}{r}\text{~and~}\sin\;\theta = \frac{y}{r}.} \\
{\text{~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~}r = 2\left( \frac{x}{r} \right)\left( \frac{y}{r} \right)} & {\text{Simplify}.} \\
{\text{~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~}r = \frac{2xy}{r^{2}}} & {\text{~Multiply~both~sides~by~}r^{2}.} \\
{\text{~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~}r^{3} = 2xy} & \\
{\left( \sqrt{x^{2} + y^{2}} \right)^{3} = 2xy} & {\text{As}\; x^{2} + y^{2} = r^{2},r = \sqrt{x^{2} + y^{2}}.}
\end{array}$$

This equation can also be written as

$$\left( {x^{2} + y^{2}} \right)^{\frac{3}{2}} = 2xy\;\text{or}\; x^{2} + y^{2} = \left( {2xy} \right)^{\frac{2}{3}}$$
:::

:::: {#fs-id1165135664937 .note}
::: title
:::

Media

Access these online resources for additional instruction and practice
with polar coordinates.

Introduction to Polar Coordinates

Comparing Polar and Rectangular Coordinates
::::

# Key Equations {#fs-id1165135407353}

  --------------------- -----------------------------------------------------------------
  Conversion formulas   cosθ= x r →x=rcosθ sinθ= y r →y=rsinθ r 2 = x 2 + y 2 tanθ= y x
  --------------------- -----------------------------------------------------------------

# Key Concepts {#fs-id1165137707236}

The polar grid is represented as a series of concentric circles
radiating out from the pole, or origin.

To plot a point in the form

(

r

,

θ

)

,

θ

\>

0

,

move in a counterclockwise direction from the polar axis by an angle of

θ

,

and then extend a directed line segment from the pole the length of

r

in the direction of

θ

.

If

θ

is negative, move in a clockwise direction, and extend a directed line
segment the length of

r

in the direction of

θ

.

See

.

If

r

is negative, extend the directed line segment in the opposite direction
of

θ

.

See

.

To convert from polar coordinates to rectangular coordinates, use the
formulas

x

=

r

cos

θ

and

y

=

r

sin

θ

.

See

and

.

To convert from rectangular coordinates to polar coordinates, use one or
more of the formulas:

cos

θ

=

x

r

,

sin

θ

=

y

r

,

tan

θ

=

y

x

,

and

r

=

x

2

\+

y

2

.

See

.

Transforming equations between polar and rectangular forms means making
the appropriate substitutions based on the available formulas, together
with algebraic manipulations. See

,

, and

.

Using the appropriate substitutions makes it possible to rewrite a polar
equation as a rectangular equation, and then graph it in the rectangular
plane. See

,

, and

.

# Section Exercises {#fs-id1165134113788}

## Verbal {#fs-id1165134113791}

How are polar coordinates different from rectangular coordinates?

For polar coordinates, the point in the plane depends on the angle from
the positive *x-*axis and distance from the origin, while in Cartesian
coordinates, the point represents the horizontal and vertical distances
from the origin. For each point in the coordinate plane, there is one
representation, but for each point in the polar plane, there are
infinite representations.

How are the polar axes different from the *x*- and *y*-axes of the
Cartesian plane?

Explain how polar coordinates are graphed.

Determine θ for the point, then move r units from the pole to plot the
point. If r is negative, move r units from the pole in the opposite
direction but along the same angle. The point is a distance of r away
from the origin at an angle of θ from the polar axis.

How are the points ( 3, π 2 ) and ( −3, π 2 ) related?

Explain why the points ( −3, π 2 ) and ( 3,− π 2 ) are the same.

The point ( −3, π 2 ) has a positive angle but a negative radius and is
plotted by moving to an angle of π 2 and then moving 3 units in the
negative direction. This places the point 3 units down the negative
*y*-axis. The point ( 3,− π 2 ) has a negative angle and a positive
radius and is plotted by first moving to an angle of − π 2 and then
moving 3 units down, which is the positive direction for a negative
angle. The point is also 3 units down the negative *y*-axis.

## Algebraic {#fs-id1165135329737}

For the following exercises, convert the given polar coordinates to
Cartesian coordinates. Remember to consider the quadrant in which the
given point is located when determining θ for the point.

( 7, 7π 6 )

( 5,π )

( −5,0 )

( 6,− π 4 )

( −3, π 6 )

( − 3 3 2 ,− 3 2 )

( 4, 7π 4 )

For the following exercises, convert the given Cartesian coordinates to
polar coordinates with r\>0,0≤θ\<2π. Remember to consider the quadrant
in which the given point is located.

( 4,2 )

( 2 5 ,0.464 )

( −4,6 )

( 3,−5 )

( 34 ,5.253 )

( −10,−13 )

( 8,8 )

( 8 2 , π 4 )

For the following exercises, convert the given Cartesian equation to a
polar equation.

x=3

y=4

r=4cscθ

y=4 x 2

y=2 x 4

r= sinθ 2co s 4 θ 3

x 2 + y 2 =4y

x 2 + y 2 =3x

r=3cosθ

x 2 − y 2 =x

x 2 − y 2 =3y

r= 3sinθ cos( 2θ )

x 2 + y 2 =9

x 2 =9y

r= 9sinθ cos 2 θ

y 2 =9x

9xy=1

r= 1 9cosθsinθ

For the following exercises, convert the given polar equation to a
Cartesian equation. Write in the standard form of a conic if possible,
and identify the conic section represented.

r=3sinθ

r=4cosθ

x 2 + y 2 =4x or ( x−2 ) 2 4 + y 2 4 =1; circle

r= 4 sinθ+7cosθ

r= 6 cosθ+3sinθ

3y+x=6; line

r=2secθ

r=3cscθ

y=3; line

r= rcosθ+2

r 2 =4secθcscθ

xy=4; hyperbola

r=4

r 2 =4

x 2 + y 2 =4; circle

r= 1 4cosθ−3sinθ

r= 3 cosθ−5sinθ

x−5y=3; line

## Graphical {#fs-id1165135202388}

For the following exercises, find the polar coordinates of the point.

( 3, 3π 4 )

( 5,π )

For the following exercises, plot the points.

( −2, π 3 )

( −1,− π 2 )

( 3.5, 7π 4 )

( −4, π 3 )

( 5, π 2 )

( 4, −5π 4 )

( 3, 5π 6 )

( −1.5, 7π 6 )

( −2, π 4 )

( 1, 3π 2 )

For the following exercises, convert the equation from rectangular to
polar form and graph on the polar axis.

5x−y=6

r= 6 5cosθ−sinθ

2x+7y=−3

x 2 + ( y−1 ) 2 =1

r=2sinθ

( x+2 ) 2 + ( y+3 ) 2 =13

x=2

r= 2 cosθ

x 2 + y 2 =5y

x 2 + y 2 =3x

r=3cosθ

For the following exercises, convert the equation from polar to
rectangular form and graph on the rectangular plane.

r=6

r=−4

x 2 + y 2 =16

θ=− 2π 3

θ= π 4

y=x

r=secθ

r=−10sinθ

x 2 + ( y+5 ) 2 =25

r=3cosθ

## Technology {#fs-id1165134032288}

Use a graphing calculator to find the rectangular coordinates of ( 2,− π
5 ). Round to the nearest thousandth.

( 1.618,−1.176 )

Use a graphing calculator to find the rectangular coordinates of ( −3,
3π 7 ). Round to the nearest thousandth.

Use a graphing calculator to find the polar coordinates of ( −7,8 ) in
degrees. Round to the nearest thousandth.

( 10.630,131.186° )

Use a graphing calculator to find the polar coordinates of ( 3,−4 ) in
degrees. Round to the nearest hundredth.

Use a graphing calculator to find the polar coordinates of ( −2,0 ) in
radians. Round to the nearest hundredth.

( 2,3.14 )or( 2,π )

## Extensions {#fs-id1165135424580}

Describe the graph of r=asecθ;a\>0.

Describe the graph of r=asecθ;a\<0.

A vertical line with a units left of the *y*-axis. 

Describe the graph of r=acscθ;a\>0.

Describe the graph of r=acscθ;a\<0.

A horizontal line with a units below the *x*-axis.

What polar equations will give an oblique line?

For the following exercise, graph the polar inequality.

r\<4

0≤θ≤ π 4

θ= π 4 ,r≥2

θ= π 4 ,r≥−3

0≤θ≤ π 3 ,r\<2

−π 6 \<θ≤ π 3 ,−3\<r\<2

# 

polar axis

on the polar grid, the equivalent of the positive

x-

axis on the rectangular grid

polar coordinates

on the polar grid, the coordinates of a point labeled

(

r

,

θ

)

,

where

θ

indicates the angle of rotation from the polar axis and

r

represents the radius, or the distance of the point from the pole in the
direction of

θ

pole

the origin of the polar grid
