m49407

> In this section you will:
>
> Test polar equations for symmetry.
>
> Graph polar equations by plotting points.

a63ed4d5-a31b-403b-9aaa-80329d8bcaa0

The planets move through space in elliptical, periodic orbits about the
sun, as shown in [\#](#). They are in constant motion, so fixing an
exact position of any planet is valid only for a moment. In other words,
we can fix only a planet's *instantaneous* position. This is one
application of polar coordinates, represented as (r,θ). We interpret r
as the distance from the center of the sun and θ as the planet's angular
bearing, or its direction from the center of the sun. In this section,
we will focus on the polar system and the graphs that are generated
directly from polar coordinates.

<figure id="Figure_08_04_001">

</figure>

# Testing Polar Equations for Symmetry {#fs-id1165135673928}

Just as a rectangular equation such as y= x 2 describes the relationship
between x and y on a Cartesian grid, a *polar equation* describes a
relationship between r and θ on a polar grid. Recall that the coordinate
pair (r,θ) indicates that we move counterclockwise from the polar axis
(positive *x*-axis) by an angle of θ, and extend a ray from the pole
(origin) r units in the direction of θ. All points that satisfy the
polar equation are on the graph.

Symmetry is a property that helps us recognize and plot the graph of any
equation. If an equation has a graph that is symmetric with respect to
an axis, it means that if we folded the graph in half over that axis,
the portion of the graph on one side would coincide with the portion on
the other side. By performing three tests, we will see how to apply the
properties of symmetry to polar equations. Further, we will use symmetry
(in addition to plotting key points, zeros, and maximums of r) to
determine the graph of a polar equation.

In the first test, we consider symmetry with respect to the line θ= π 2
(*y*-axis). We replace (r,θ) with (−r,−θ) to determine if the new
equation is equivalent to the original equation. For example, suppose we
are given the equation r=2sinθ;

$$\begin{array}{ll}
{r = 2\sin\;\theta} & \\
{-r = 2\sin(-\theta)\begin{array}{llll}
 & & & 
\end{array}} & {\text{Replace}\;(r,\theta)\;\text{with~}(-r,-\theta).} \\
{-r = -2\sin\;\theta} & {\text{Identity:~}\sin(-\theta) = -\sin\;\theta.} \\
{r = 2\sin\;\theta} & {\text{Multiply~both~sides~by}-1.}
\end{array}$$

This equation exhibits symmetry with respect to the line θ= π 2 .

In the second test, we consider symmetry with respect to the polar axis
( x -axis). We replace (r,θ) with ( r,−θ ) or ( −r,π−θ ) to determine
equivalency between the tested equation and the original. For example,
suppose we are given the equation r=1−2cosθ.

$$\begin{array}{ll}
{r = 1 - 2\cos\;\theta} & \\
{r = 1 - 2\cos(-\theta)\begin{array}{llll}
 & & & 
\end{array}} & {\text{Replace~}(r,\theta)\;\text{with}\;(r,-\theta).} \\
{r = 1 - 2\cos\;\theta} & \text{Even/Odd~identity}
\end{array}$$

The graph of this equation exhibits symmetry with respect to the polar
axis.

In the third test, we consider symmetry with respect to the pole
(origin). We replace (r,θ) with ( −r,θ ) to determine if the tested
equation is equivalent to the original equation. For example, suppose we
are given the equation r=2sin(3θ).

$$\begin{matrix}
{r = 2\sin(3\theta)} \\
{- r = 2\sin(3\theta)}
\end{matrix}$$

The equation has failed the symmetry test, but that does not mean that
it is not symmetric with respect to the pole. Passing one or more of the
symmetry tests verifies that symmetry will be exhibited in a graph.
However, failing the symmetry tests does not necessarily indicate that a
graph will not be symmetric about the line θ= π 2 , the polar axis, or
the pole. In these instances, we can confirm that symmetry exists by
plotting reflecting points across the apparent axis of symmetry or the
pole. Testing for symmetry is a technique that simplifies the graphing
of polar equations, but its application is not perfect.

:::: {#fs-id1165137410284 .note}
::: title
Symmetry Tests
:::

A polar equation describes a curve on the polar grid. The graph of a
polar equation can be evaluated for three types of symmetry, as shown in
[\#](#).

<figure id="Figure_08_04_002">

</figure>
::::

:::: {#fs-id1165137410344 .note}
::: title
:::

How To

*Given a polar equation, test for symmetry.*

Substitute the appropriate combination of components for

(

r

,

θ

)

:

(

−

r

,

−

θ

)

for

θ

=

π

2

symmetry;

(

r

,

−

θ

)

for polar axis symmetry; and

(

−

r

,

θ

)

for symmetry with respect to the pole.

If the resulting equations are equivalent in one or more of the tests,
the graph produces the expected symmetry.
::::

::: {#Example_08_04_01 .example}
Test the equation r=2sinθ for symmetry.

Test for each of the three types of symmetry.

  --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ---------------------------------------------------------------------
  1\) Replacing (r,θ) with (−r,−θ) yields the same result. Thus, the graph is symmetric with respect to the line θ= π 2 .                                         −r=2sin(−θ) −r=−2sinθ Even-odd identity r=2sinθ Multiplyby−1 Passed
  2\) Replacing θ with −θ does not yield the same equation. Therefore, the graph fails the test and may or may not be symmetric with respect to the polar axis.   r=2sin(−θ) r=−2sinθ Even-odd identity r=−2sinθ≠2sinθ Failed
  3\) Replacing r with --r changes the equation and fails the test. The graph may or may not be symmetric with respect to the pole.                               −r=2sinθ   r=−2sinθ≠2sinθ Failed
  --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ---------------------------------------------------------------------

Using a graphing calculator, we can see that the equation r=2sinθ is a
circle centered at (0,1) with radius r=1 and is indeed symmetric to the
line θ= π 2 . We can also see that the graph is not symmetric with the
polar axis or the pole. See [\#](#).

<figure id="Figure_08_04_003">

</figure>
:::

:::: {#fs-id1165137535453 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Test the equation for symmetry: r=−2cosθ.

The equation fails the symmetry test with respect to the line θ= π 2 and
with respect to the pole. It passes the polar axis symmetry test.
::::

# Graphing Polar Equations by Plotting Points {#fs-id1165135353123}

To graph in the rectangular coordinate system we construct a table of x
and y values. To graph in the polar coordinate system we construct a
table of θ and r values. We enter values of θ into a polar equation and
calculate r. However, using the properties of symmetry and finding key
values of θ and r means fewer calculations will be needed.

## Finding Zeros and Maxima {#fs-id1165137503035}

To find the zeros of a polar equation, we solve for the values of θ that
result in r=0. Recall that, to find the zeros of polynomial functions,
we set the equation equal to zero and then solve for x. We use the same
process for polar equations. Set r=0, and solve for θ.

For many of the forms we will encounter, the maximum value of a polar
equation is found by substituting those values of θ into the equation
that result in the maximum value of the trigonometric functions.
Consider r=5cosθ; the maximum distance between the curve and the pole is
5 units. The maximum value of the cosine function is 1 when θ=0, so our
polar equation is 5cosθ, and the value θ=0 will yield the maximum \| r
\|.

Similarly, the maximum value of the sine function is 1 when θ= π 2 , and
if our polar equation is r=5sinθ, the value θ= π 2 will yield the
maximum \| r \|. We may find additional information by calculating
values of r when θ=0. These points would be polar axis intercepts, which
may be helpful in drawing the graph and identifying the curve of a polar
equation.

::: {#Example_08_04_02 .example}
Using the equation in [\#](#), find the zeros and maximum \| r \| and,
if necessary, the polar axis intercepts of r=2sinθ.

To find the zeros, set r equal to zero and solve for θ.

$$\begin{array}{ll}
{2\sin\;\theta = 0} & \\
{\sin\;\theta = 0} & \\
{\theta = \sin^{- 1}0} & \\
{\theta = n\pi} & {\text{where~}n\text{~is~an~integer}}
\end{array}$$

Substitute any one of the θ values into the equation. We will use 0.

$$\begin{array}{l}
\begin{array}{l}
 \\
{r = 2\sin(0)}
\end{array} \\
{r = 0}
\end{array}$$

The points (0,0) and (0,±nπ) are the zeros of the equation. They all
coincide, so only one point is visible on the graph. This point is also
the only polar axis intercept.

To find the maximum value of the equation, look at the maximum value of
the trigonometric function sinθ, which occurs when θ= π 2 ±2kπ resulting
in sin( π 2 )=1. Substitute π 2 for θ.

$$\begin{array}{l}
{r = 2\sin\left( \frac{\pi}{2} \right)} \\
{r = 2(1)} \\
{r = 2}
\end{array}$$

The point ( 2, π 2 ) will be the maximum value on the graph. Let's plot
a few more points to verify the graph of a circle. See [\#](#) and
[\#](#).

  θ      r=2sinθ               r
  ------ --------------------- ------
  0      r=2sin(0)=0           0
  π 6    r=2sin( π 6 )=1       1
  π 3    r=2sin( π 3 )≈1.73    1.73
  π 2    r=2sin( π 2 )=2       2
  2π 3   r=2sin( 2π 3 )≈1.73   1.73
  5π 6   r=2sin( 5π 6 )=1      1
  π      r=2sin( π )=0         0

<figure id="Figure_08_04_004">

</figure>
:::

:::: {#fs-id1165135253121 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Without converting to Cartesian coordinates, test the given equation for
symmetry and find the zeros and maximum values of \| r \|: r=3cosθ.

Tests will reveal symmetry about the polar axis. The zero is ( 0, π 2 ),
and the maximum value is (3,0).
::::

## Investigating Circles {#fs-id1165137419746}

Now we have seen the equation of a circle in the polar coordinate
system. In the last two examples, the same equation was used to
illustrate the properties of symmetry and demonstrate how to find the
zeros, maximum values, and plotted points that produced the graphs.
However, the circle is only one of many shapes in the set of polar
curves.

There are five classic polar curves*: cardioids*, *limaҫons,
lemniscates, rose curves*, and *Archimedes' spirals*. We will briefly
touch on the polar formulas for the circle before moving on to the
classic curves and their variations.

:::: {#fs-id1165137939908 .note}
::: title
Formulas for the Equation of a Circle
:::

Some of the formulas that produce the graph of a circle in polar
coordinates are given by r=acosθ and r=asinθ, where a is the diameter of
the circle or the distance from the pole to the farthest point on the
circumference. The radius is \| a \| 2 , or one-half the diameter. For
r=acosθ,  the center is ( a 2 ,0 ). For r=asinθ, the center is ( a 2 ,π2
). [\#](#) shows the graphs of these four circles.

<figure id="Figure_08_04_005">

</figure>
::::

::: {#Example_08_04_03 .example}
Sketch the graph of r=4cosθ.

First, testing the equation for symmetry, we find that the graph is
symmetric about the polar axis. Next, we find the zeros and maximum \| r
\| for r=4cosθ. First, set r=0, and solve for θ . Thus, a zero occurs at
θ= π 2 ±kπ. A key point to plot is ( 0,​​ π 2 ).

To find the maximum value of r, note that the maximum value of the
cosine function is 1 when θ=0±2kπ. Substitute θ=0 into the equation:

$$\begin{matrix}
{r = 4\cos\;\theta} \\
{r = 4\cos(0)} \\
{r = 4(1) = 4}
\end{matrix}$$

The maximum value of the equation is 4. A key point to plot is (4,0).

As r=4cosθ is symmetric with respect to the polar axis, we only need to
calculate *r*-values for θ over the interval \[0, π\]. Points in the
upper quadrant can then be reflected to the lower quadrant. Make a table
of values similar to [\#](#). The graph is shown in [\#](#)*.*

  ------- --- ------ ------ ----- ----- ------ ------- ------- ----
  *θ*     0   π 6    π 4    π 3   π 2   2π 3   3π 4    5π 6    π
  *r*     4   3.46   2.83   2     0     −2     −2.83   −3.46   −4
  ------- --- ------ ------ ----- ----- ------ ------- ------- ----

<figure id="Figure_08_04_006">

</figure>
:::

## Investigating Cardioids {#fs-id1165137551063}

While translating from polar coordinates to Cartesian coordinates may
seem simpler in some instances, graphing the classic curves is actually
less complicated in the polar system. The next curve is called a
cardioid, as it resembles a heart. This shape is often included with the
family of curves called limaçons, but here we will discuss the cardioid
on its own.

:::: {#fs-id1165134389046 .note}
::: title
Formulas for a Cardioid
:::

The formulas that produce the graphs of a cardioid are given by
r=a±bcosθ and r=a±bsinθ where a\>0, b\>0, and a b =1. The cardioid graph
passes through the pole, as we can see in [\#](#).

<figure id="Figure_08_04_007">

</figure>
::::

:::: {#fs-id1165135259648 .note}
::: title
:::

How To

*Given the polar equation of a cardioid, sketch its graph.*

Check equation for the three types of symmetry.

Find the zeros. Set

r

=

0\.

Find the maximum value of the equation according to the maximum value of
the trigonometric expression.

Make a table of values for

r

and

θ

.

Plot the points and sketch the graph.
::::

::: {#Example_08_04_04 .example}
Sketch the graph of r=2+2cosθ.

First, testing the equation for symmetry, we find that the graph of this
equation will be symmetric about the polar axis. Next, we find the zeros
and maximums. Setting r=0, we have θ=π+2kπ. The zero of the equation is
located at ( 0,π ). The graph passes through this point.

The maximum value of r=2+2cosθ occurs when cosθ is a maximum, which is
when cosθ=1 or when θ=0. Substitute θ=0 into the equation, and solve for
r.

$$\begin{array}{l}
\begin{array}{l}
 \\
{r = 2 + 2\cos(0)}
\end{array} \\
{r = 2 + 2(1) = 4}
\end{array}$$

The point (4,0) is the maximum value on the graph.

We found that the polar equation is symmetric with respect to the polar
axis, but as it extends to all four quadrants, we need to plot values
over the interval \[0,π\]. The upper portion of the graph is then
reflected over the polar axis. Next, we make a table of values, as in
[\#](#), and then we plot the points and draw the graph. See [\#](#).

  ------- --- ------ ----- ------ ---
  *θ*     0   π 4    π 2   2π 3   π
  *r*     4   3.41   2     1      0
  ------- --- ------ ----- ------ ---

<figure id="Figure_08_04_008">

</figure>
:::

## Investigating Limaçons {#fs-id1165135403266}

The word *limaçon* is Old French for "snail," a name that describes the
shape of the graph. As mentioned earlier, the cardioid is a member of
the limaçon family, and we can see the similarities in the graphs. The
other images in this category include the one-loop limaçon and the
two-loop (or inner-loop) limaçon. *One-loop limaçons* are sometimes
referred to as dimpled limaçons when 1\< a b \<2 and convex limaçons
when a b ≥2.

:::: {#fs-id1165137451882 .note}
::: title
Formulas for One-Loop Limaçons
:::

The formulas that produce the graph of a dimpled one-loop limaçon are
given by r=a±bcosθ and r=a±bsinθ where a\>0,b\>0, and 1\< a b \<2. All
four graphs are shown in [\#](#).

<figure id="Figure_08_04_009">

</figure>
::::

:::: {#fs-id1165132935120 .note}
::: title
:::

How To

*Given a polar equation for a one-loop limaçon, sketch the graph.*

Test the equation for symmetry. Remember that failing a symmetry test
does not mean that the shape will not exhibit symmetry. Often the
symmetry may reveal itself when the points are plotted.

Find the zeros.

Find the maximum values according to the trigonometric expression.

Make a table.

Plot the points and sketch the graph.
::::

::: {#Example_08_04_05 .example}
Graph the equation r=4−3sinθ.

First, testing the equation for symmetry, we find that it fails all
three symmetry tests, meaning that the graph may or may not exhibit
symmetry, so we cannot use the symmetry to help us graph it. However,
this equation has a graph that clearly displays symmetry with respect to
the line θ= π 2 , yet it fails all the three symmetry tests. A graphing
calculator will immediately illustrate the graph's reflective quality.

Next, we find the zeros and maximum, and plot the reflecting points to
verify any symmetry. Setting r=0 results in θ being undefined. What does
this mean? How could θ be undefined? The angle θ is undefined for any
value of sinθ\>1. Therefore, θ is undefined because there is no value of
θ for which sinθ\>1. Consequently, the graph does not pass through the
pole. Perhaps the graph does cross the polar axis, but not at the pole.
We can investigate other intercepts by calculating r when θ=0.

$$\begin{array}{l}
{r(0) = 4 - 3\sin(0)} \\
{r = 4 - 3 \cdot 0 = 4}
\end{array}$$

So, there is at least one polar axis intercept at (4,0).

Next, as the maximum value of the sine function is 1 when θ= π 2 , we
will substitute θ= π 2 into the equation and solve for r. Thus, r=1.

Make a table of the coordinates similar to [\#](#).

  ------- --- ----- ----- ----- ------ ------ --- ------ ------ ------ ------ ------- ----
  *θ*     0   π 6   π 3   π 2   2π 3   5π 6   π   7π 6   4π 3   3π 2   5π 3   11π 6   2π
  *r*     4   2.5   1.4   1     1.4    2.5    4   5.5    6.6    7      6.6    5.5     4
  ------- --- ----- ----- ----- ------ ------ --- ------ ------ ------ ------ ------- ----

The graph is shown in [\#](#).

<figure id="Figure_08_04_010">

</figure>

This is an example of a curve for which making a table of values is
critical to producing an accurate graph. The symmetry tests fail; the
zero is undefined. While it may be apparent that an equation involving
sinθ is likely symmetric with respect to the line θ= π 2 , evaluating
more points helps to verify that the graph is correct.
:::

:::: {#fs-id1165134081353 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Sketch the graph of r=3−2cosθ.
::::

Another type of limaçon, the *inner-loop limaçon*, is named for the loop
formed inside the general limaçon shape. It was discovered by the German
artist Albrecht Dürer(1471-1528), who revealed a method for drawing the
inner-loop limaçon in his 1525 book *Underweysung der Messing*. A
century later, the father of mathematician Blaise Pascal, Étienne
Pascal(1588-1651), rediscovered it.

:::: {#fs-id1165137482991 .note}
::: title
Formulas for Inner-Loop Limaçons
:::

The formulas that generate the inner-loop limaçons are given by
r=a±bcosθ and r=a±bsinθ where a\>0, b\>0, and a\<b. The graph of the
inner-loop limaçon passes through the pole twice: once for the outer
loop, and once for the inner loop. See [\#](#) for the graphs.

<figure id="Figure_08_04_012">

</figure>
::::

::: {#Example_08_04_06 .example}
Sketch the graph of r=2+5cosθ.

Testing for symmetry, we find that the graph of the equation is
symmetric about the polar axis. Next, finding the zeros reveals that
when r=0, θ=1.98. The maximum \| r \| is found when cosθ=1 or when θ=0.
Thus, the maximum is found at the point (7, 0).

Even though we have found symmetry, the zero, and the maximum, plotting
more points will help to define the shape, and then a pattern will
emerge.

See [\#](#).

  ------- --- ----- ----- ----- ------ ------ ---- ------ ------ ------ ------ ------- ----
  *θ*     0   π 6   π 3   π 2   2π 3   5π 6   π    7π 6   4π 3   3π 2   5π 3   11π 6   2π
  *r*     7   6.3   4.5   2     −0.5   −2.3   −3   −2.3   −0.5   2      4.5    6.3     7
  ------- --- ----- ----- ----- ------ ------ ---- ------ ------ ------ ------ ------- ----

As expected, the values begin to repeat after θ=π. The graph is shown in
[\#](#).

<figure id="Figure_08_04_013">

</figure>
:::

## Investigating Lemniscates {#fs-id1165135640493}

The lemniscate is a polar curve resembling the infinity symbol ∞ or a
figure 8. Centered at the pole, a lemniscate is symmetrical by
definition.

:::: {#fs-id1165137639236 .note}
::: title
Formulas for Lemniscates
:::

The formulas that generate the graph of a lemniscate are given by r 2 =
a 2 cos2θ and r 2 = a 2 sin2θ where a≠0. The formula r 2 = a 2 sin2θ is
symmetric with respect to the pole. The formula r 2 = a 2 cos2θ is
symmetric with respect to the pole, the line θ= π 2 , and the polar
axis. See [\#](#) for the graphs.

<figure id="Figure_08_04_014">

</figure>
::::

::: {#Example_08_04_07 .example}
Sketch the graph of r 2 =4cos2θ.

The equation exhibits symmetry with respect to the line θ= π 2 , the
polar axis, and the pole.

Let's find the zeros. It should be routine by now, but we will approach
this equation a little differently by making the substitution u=2θ.

$$\begin{array}{ll}
{0 = 4\cos\; 2\theta} & \\
{0 = 4\cos\; u} & \\
{0 = \cos\; u} & \\
{\cos^{- 1}0 = \frac{\pi}{2}} & \\
{u = \frac{\pi}{2}} & {\text{Substitute~}2\theta\text{~back~in~for~}u.} \\
{2\theta = \frac{\pi}{2}} & \\
{\theta = \frac{\pi}{4}} & 
\end{array}$$

So, the point ( 0, π 4 ) is a zero of the equation.

Now let's find the maximum value. Since the maximum of cosu=1 when u=0,
the maximum cos2θ=1 when 2θ=0. Thus,

$$\begin{matrix}
{r^{2} = 4\cos(0)} \\
{r^{2} = 4(1) = 4} \\
{r = \pm \sqrt{4}\; \pm 2}
\end{matrix}$$

We have a maximum at (2, 0). Since this graph is symmetric with respect
to the pole, the line θ= π 2 , and the polar axis, we only need to plot
points in the first quadrant.

Make a table similar to [\#](#).

  ------- ---- ----- -----
  *θ*     0    π 6   π 4
  *r*     ±2   ± 2   0
  ------- ---- ----- -----

Plot the points on the graph, such as the one shown in [\#](#).

<figure id="Figure_08_04_015">

</figure>

Making a substitution such as u=2θ is a common practice in mathematics
because it can make calculations simpler. However, we must not forget to
replace the substitution term with the original term at the end, and
then solve for the unknown.

Some of the points on this graph may not show up using the Trace
function on the TI-84 graphing calculator, and the calculator table may
show an error for these same points of r. This is because there are no
real square roots for these values of θ. In other words, the
corresponding *r*-values of 4cos(2θ) are complex numbers because there
is a negative number under the radical.
:::

## Investigating Rose Curves {#fs-id1165137473462}

The next type of polar equation produces a petal-like shape called a
rose curve. Although the graphs look complex, a simple polar equation
generates the pattern.

:::: {#fs-id1165137824732 .note}
::: title
Rose Curves
:::

The formulas that generate the graph of a rose curve are given by
r=acosnθ and r=asinnθ where a≠0. If n is even, the curve has 2n petals.
If n is odd, the curve has n petals. See [\#](#).

<figure id="Figure_08_04_016">

</figure>
::::

::: {#Example_08_04_08 .example}
Sketch the graph of r=2cos4θ.

Testing for symmetry, we find again that the symmetry tests do not tell
the whole story. The graph is not only symmetric with respect to the
polar axis, but also with respect to the line θ= π 2 and the pole.

Now we will find the zeros. First make the substitution u=4θ.

$$\begin{matrix}
{0 = 2\cos\; 4\theta} \\
{0 = \cos\; 4\theta} \\
{0 = \cos\; u} \\
{\cos^{- 1}0 = u} \\
{u = \frac{\pi}{2}} \\
{4\theta = \frac{\pi}{2}} \\
{\theta = \frac{\pi}{8}}
\end{matrix}$$

The zero is θ= π 8 . The point ( 0, π 8 ) is on the curve.

Next, we find the maximum \| r \|. We know that the maximum value of
cosu=1 when θ=0. Thus,

$$\begin{array}{l}
{r = 2\cos(4 \cdot 0)} \\
{r = 2\cos(0)} \\
{r = 2(1) = 2}
\end{array}$$

The point ( 2,0 ) is on the curve.

The graph of the rose curve has unique properties, which are revealed in
[\#](#).

  ------- --- ----- ----- ------ ----- ------ ------
  *θ*     0   π 8   π 4   3π 8   π 2   5π 8   3π 4
  *r*     2   0     −2    0      2     0      −2
  ------- --- ----- ----- ------ ----- ------ ------

As r=0 when θ= π 8 , it makes sense to divide values in the table by π 8
units. A definite pattern emerges. Look at the range of *r*-values: 2,
0, −2, 0, 2, 0, −2, and so on. This represents the development of the
curve one petal at a time. Starting at r=0, each petal extends out a
distance of r=2, and then turns back to zero 2n times for a total of
eight petals. See the graph in [\#](#).

<figure id="Figure_08_04_017">

</figure>

When these curves are drawn, it is best to plot the points in order, as
in the [\#](#). This allows us to see how the graph hits a maximum (the
tip of a petal), loops back crossing the pole, hits the opposite
maximum, and loops back to the pole. The action is continuous until all
the petals are drawn.
:::

:::: {#fs-id1165137731924 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Sketch the graph of r=4sin( 2θ ).

The graph is a rose curve, n even
::::

::: {#Example_08_04_09 .example}
Sketch the graph of r=2sin( 5θ ).

The graph of the equation shows symmetry with respect to the line θ= π 2
. Next, find the zeros and maximum. We will want to make the
substitution u=5θ.

$$\begin{matrix}
{0 = 2\sin(5\theta)} \\
{0 = \sin\; u} \\
{\sin^{- 1}0 = 0} \\
{u = 0} \\
{5\theta = 0} \\
{\theta = 0}
\end{matrix}$$

The maximum value is calculated at the angle where sinθ is a maximum.
Therefore,

$$\begin{array}{l}
\begin{array}{l}
 \\
{r = 2\sin\left( {5 \cdot \frac{\pi}{2}} \right)}
\end{array} \\
{r = 2(1) = 2}
\end{array}$$

Thus, the maximum value of the polar equation is 2. This is the length
of each petal. As the curve for n odd yields the same number of petals
as n, there will be five petals on the graph. See [\#](#).

<figure id="Figure_08_04_019">

</figure>

Create a table of values similar to [\#](#).

  ------- --- ----- ------- ----- ------- ------ ---
  *θ*     0   π 6   π 3     π 2   2π 3    5π 6   π
  *r*     0   1     −1.73   2     −1.73   1      0
  ------- --- ----- ------- ----- ------- ------ ---
:::

:::: {#fs-id1165135331737 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Sketch the graph of r=3cos(3θ).

Rose curve, n odd
::::

## Investigating the Archimedes' Spiral {#fs-id1165135432637}

The final polar equation we will discuss is the Archimedes' spiral,
named for its discoverer, the Greek mathematician Archimedes (c. 287
BCE-c. 212 BCE), who is credited with numerous discoveries in the fields
of geometry and mechanics.

:::: {#fs-id1165133097210 .note}
::: title
Archimedes' Spiral
:::

The formula that generates the graph of the Archimedes' spiral is given
by r=θ for θ≥0. As θ increases, r increases at a constant rate in an
ever-widening, never-ending, spiraling path. See [\#](#).

<figure id="Figure_08_04_020">

</figure>
::::

:::: {#fs-id1165137582354 .note}
::: title
:::

How To

*Given an Archimedes' spiral over \[ 0,2π \], sketch the graph.*

Make a table of values for

r

and

θ

over the given domain.

Plot the points and sketch the graph.
::::

::: {#Example_08_04_10 .example}
Sketch the graph of r=θ over \[0,2π\].

As r is equal to θ, the plot of the Archimedes' spiral begins at the
pole at the point (0, 0). While the graph hints of symmetry, there is no
formal symmetry with regard to passing the symmetry tests. Further,
there is no maximum value, unless the domain is restricted.

Create a table such as [\#](#).

  ------- ------- ------ ------ ------ ------ ------
  *θ*     π 4     π 2    π      3π 2   7π 4   2π
  *r*     0.785   1.57   3.14   4.71   5.50   6.28
  ------- ------- ------ ------ ------ ------ ------

Notice that the *r*-values are just the decimal form of the angle
measured in radians. We can see them on a graph in [\#](#).

<figure id="Figure_08_04_021">

</figure>

The domain of this polar curve is \[ 0,2π \]. In general, however, the
domain of this function is ( −∞,∞ ). Graphing the equation of the
Archimedes' spiral is rather simple, although the image makes it seem
like it would be complex.
:::

:::: {#fs-id1165135432988 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Sketch the graph of r=−θ over the interval \[ 0,4π \].
::::

# Summary of Curves {#fs-id1165134301472}

We have explored a number of seemingly complex polar curves in this
section. [\#](#) and [\#](#) summarize the graphs and equations for each
of these curves.

<figure id="Figure_08_04_023">

</figure>

<figure id="Figure_08_04_024">

</figure>

:::: {#fs-id1165135193264 .note}
::: title
:::

Media

Access these online resources for additional instruction and practice
with graphs of polar coordinates.

Graphing Polar Equations Part 1

Graphing Polar Equations Part 2

Animation: The Graphs of Polar Equations

Graphing Polar Equations on the TI-84
::::

# Key Concepts {#fs-id1165137544011}

It is easier to graph polar equations if we can test the equations for
symmetry with respect to the line

θ

=

π

2

,

the polar axis, or the pole.

There are three symmetry tests that indicate whether the graph of a
polar equation will exhibit symmetry. If an equation fails a symmetry
test, the graph may or may not exhibit symmetry. See

.

Polar equations may be graphed by making a table of values for

θ

and

r

.

The maximum value of a polar equation is found by substituting the value

θ

that leads to the maximum value of the trigonometric expression.

The zeros of a polar equation are found by setting

r

=

0

and solving for

θ

.

See

.

Some formulas that produce the graph of a circle in polar coordinates
are given by

r

=

a

cos

θ

and

r

=

a

sin

θ

.

See

.

The formulas that produce the graphs of a cardioid are given by

r

=

a

±

b

cos

θ

and

r

=

a

±

b

sin

θ

,

for

a

\>

0

,

b

\>

0

,

and

a

b

=

1\.

See

.

The formulas that produce the graphs of a one-loop limaçon are given by

r

=

a

±

b

cos

θ

and

r

=

a

±

b

sin

θ

for

1

\<

a

b

\<

2\.

See

.

The formulas that produce the graphs of an inner-loop limaçon are given
by

r

=

a

±

b

cos

θ

and

r

=

a

±

b

sin

θ

for

a

\>

0

,

b

\>

0

,

and

a

\<

b

.

See

.

The formulas that produce the graphs of a lemniscates are given by

r

2

=

a

2

cos

2

θ

and

r

2

=

a

2

sin

2

θ

,

where

a

≠

0\.

See

.

The formulas that produce the graphs of rose curves are given by

r

=

a

cos

n

θ

and

r

=

a

sin

n

θ

,

where

a

≠

0

;

if

n

is even, there are

2

n

petals, and if

n

is odd, there are

n

petals. See

and

.

The formula that produces the graph of an Archimedes' spiral is given by

r

=

θ

,

θ

≥

0\.

See

.

# Section Exercises {#fs-id1165137533434}

## Verbal {#fs-id1165137533437}

Describe the three types of symmetry in polar graphs, and compare them
to the symmetry of the Cartesian plane.

Symmetry with respect to the polar axis is similar to symmetry about the
x -axis, symmetry with respect to the pole is similar to symmetry about
the origin, and symmetric with respect to the line θ= π 2 is similar to
symmetry about the y -axis.

Which of the three types of symmetries for polar graphs correspond to
the symmetries with respect to the *x*-axis, *y*-axis, and origin?

What are the steps to follow when graphing polar equations?

Test for symmetry; find zeros, intercepts, and maxima; make a table of
values. Decide the general type of graph, cardioid, limaçon, lemniscate,
etc., then plot points at θ=0, π 2 , π and  3π 2 , and sketch the graph.

Describe the shapes of the graphs of cardioids, limaçons, and
lemniscates.

What part of the equation determines the shape of the graph of a polar
equation?

The shape of the polar graph is determined by whether or not it includes
a sine, a cosine, and constants in the equation.

## Graphical {#fs-id1165134043905}

For the following exercises, test the equation for symmetry.

r=5cos3θ

r=3−3cosθ

symmetric with respect to the polar axis

r=3+2sinθ

r=3sin2θ

symmetric with respect to the polar axis, symmetric with respect to the
line θ= π 2 , symmetric with respect to the pole

r=4

r=2θ

symmetric with respect to the line θ=π2

r=4cos θ 2

r= 2 θ

Symmetric with respect to line θ=π2 (y-axis)

r=3 1− cos 2 θ

r= 5sin2θ

symmetric with respect to the pole

For the following exercises, graph the polar equation. Identify the name
of the shape.

r=3cosθ

r=4sinθ

circle

r=2+2cosθ

r=2−2cosθ

cardioid

r=5−5sinθ

r=3+3sinθ

cardioid

r=3+2sinθ

r=7+4sinθ

one-loop/dimpled limaçon

r=4+3cosθ

r=5+4cosθ

one-loop/dimpled limaçon

r=10+9cosθ

r=1+3sinθ

inner loop/two-loop limaçon

r=2+5sinθ

r=5+7sinθ

inner loop/two-loop limaçon

r=2+4cosθ

r=5+6cosθ

inner loop/two-loop limaçon

r 2 =36cos( 2θ )

r 2 =10cos( 2θ )

lemniscate

r 2 =4sin( 2θ )

r 2 =10sin( 2θ )

lemniscate

r=3sin(2θ)

r=3cos(2θ)

rose curve

r=5sin(3θ)

r=4sin(4θ)

rose curve

r=4sin(5θ)

r=−θ

Archimedes' spiral

r=2θ

r=−3θ

Archimedes' spiral

## Technology {#fs-id1165137437103}

For the following exercises, use a graphing calculator to sketch the
graph of the polar equation.

r= 1 θ

r= 1 θ

r=2sinθtanθ, a cissoid

r=2 1− sin 2 θ , a hippopede

r=5+cos( 4θ )

r=2−sin( 2θ )

r= θ 2

r=θ+1

r=θsinθ

r=θcosθ

For the following exercises, use a graphing utility to graph each pair
of polar equations on a domain of \[ 0,4π \] and then explain the
differences shown in the graphs.

r=θ,r=−θ

r=θ,r=θ+sinθ

They are both spirals, but not quite the same.

r=sinθ+θ,r=sinθ−θ

r=2sin( θ 2 ),r=θsin( θ 2 )

Both graphs are curves with 2 loops. The equation with a coefficient of
θ has two loops on the left, the equation with a coefficient of 2 has
two loops side by side. Graph these from 0 to 4π to get a better
picture.

r=sin( cos(3θ) )r=sin(3θ)

On a graphing utility, graph r=sin( 16 5 θ ) on \[ 0, 4π \], \[ 0, 8π
\], \[ 0, 12π \] , and \[ 0, 16π \]. Describe the effect of increasing
the width of the domain.

When the width of the domain is increased, more petals of the flower are
visible.

On a graphing utility, graph and sketch r=sinθ+ ( sin( 5 2 θ ) ) 3 on \[
0,4π \].

On a graphing utility, graph each polar equation. Explain the
similarities and differences you observe in the graphs.

$$\begin{array}{l}
{r_{1} = 3\sin(3\theta)} \\
{r_{2} = 2\sin(3\theta)} \\
{r_{3} = \sin(3\theta)}
\end{array}$$

The graphs are three-petal, rose curves. The larger the coefficient, the
greater the curve's distance from the pole.

On a graphing utility, graph each polar equation. Explain the
similarities and differences you observe in the graphs.

$$\begin{array}{l}
{r_{1} = 3 + 3\cos\;\theta} \\
{r_{2} = 2 + 2\cos\;\theta} \\
{r_{3} = 1 + \cos\;\theta}
\end{array}$$

On a graphing utility, graph each polar equation. Explain the
similarities and differences you observe in the graphs.

$$\begin{array}{l}
{r_{1} = 3\theta} \\
{r_{2} = 2\theta} \\
{r_{3} = \theta}
\end{array}$$

The graphs are spirals. The smaller the coefficient, the tighter the
spiral.

## Extensions {#fs-id1165137407208}

For the following exercises, draw each polar equation on the same set of
polar axes, and find the points of intersection.

r 1 =3+2sinθ, r 2 =2

r 1 =6−4cosθ, r 2 =4

( 4, π 3 ),( 4, 5π 3 )

r 1 =1+sinθ, r 2 =3sinθ

r 1 =1+cosθ, r 2 =3cosθ

( 3 2 , π 3 ),( 3 2 , 5π 3 )

r 1 =cos( 2θ ), r 2 =sin( 2θ )

r 1 = sin 2 ( 2θ ), r 2 =1−cos( 4θ )

( 0, π 2 ),( 0,π ),( 0, 3π 2 ),( 0,2π )

r 1 = 3 , r 2 =2sin( θ )

r 1 2 =sinθ, r 2 2 =cosθ

( 8 4 2 , π 4 ),( 8 4 2 , 5π 4 ) and at θ= 3π 4 , 7π 4 since r is
squared

r 1 =1+cosθ, r 2 =1−sinθ

# 

Archimedes' spiral

a polar curve given by

r

=

θ

.

When multiplied by a constant, the equation appears as

r

=

a

θ

.

As

r

=

θ

,

the curve continues to widen in a spiral path over the domain.

cardioid

a member of the limaçon family of curves, named for its resemblance to a
heart; its equation is given as

r

=

a

±

b

cos

θ

and

r

=

a

±

b

sin

θ

,

where

a

b

=

1

convex limaҫon

a type of one-loop limaçon represented by

r

=

a

±

b

cos

θ

and

r

=

a

±

b

sin

θ

such that

a

b

≥

2

dimpled limaҫon

a type of one-loop limaçon represented by

r

=

a

±

b

cos

θ

and

r

=

a

±

b

sin

θ

such that

1

\<

a

b

\<

2

inner-loop limaçon

a polar curve similar to the cardioid, but with an inner loop; passes
through the pole twice; represented by

r

=

a

±

b

cos

θ

and

r

=

a

±

b

sin

θ

where

a

\<

b

lemniscate

a polar curve resembling a figure 8 and given by the equation

r

2

=

a

2

cos

2

θ

and

r

2

=

a

2

sin

2

θ

,

a

≠

0

one-loop limaҫon

a polar curve represented by

r

=

a

±

b

cos

θ

and

r

=

a

±

b

sin

θ

such that

a

\>

0

,

b

\>

0

,

and

a

b

\>

1

;

may be dimpled or convex; does not pass through the pole

polar equation

an equation describing a curve on the polar grid.

rose curve

a polar equation resembling a flower, given by the equations

r

=

a

cos

n

θ

and

r

=

a

sin

n

θ

;

when

n

is even there are

2

n

petals, and the curve is highly symmetrical; when

n

is odd there are

n

petals.
