m49408

> In this section, you will:
>
> Plot complex numbers in the complex plane.
>
> Find the absolute value of a complex number.
>
> Write complex numbers in polar form.
>
> Convert a complex number from polar to rectangular form.
>
> Find products of complex numbers in polar form.
>
> Find quotients of complex numbers in polar form.
>
> Find powers of complex numbers in polar form.
>
> Find roots of complex numbers in polar form.

5217ca36-7905-420a-b241-8d24df993e56

"God made the integers; all else is the work of man." This rather famous
quote by nineteenth-century German mathematician Leopold Kronecker sets
the stage for this section on the polar form of a complex number.
Complex numbers were invented by people and represent over a thousand
years of continuous investigation and struggle by mathematicians such as
Pythagoras, Descartes, De Moivre, Euler, Gauss, and others. Complex
numbers answered questions that for centuries had puzzled the greatest
minds in science.

We first encountered complex numbers in [Complex Numbers](#). In this
section, we will focus on the mechanics of working with complex numbers:
translation of complex numbers from polar form to rectangular form and
vice versa, interpretation of complex numbers in the scheme of
applications, and application of De Moivre's Theorem.

# Plotting Complex Numbers in the Complex Plane {#fs-id1165133355948}

Plotting a complex number a+bi is similar to plotting a real number,
except that the horizontal axis represents the real part of the number,
a, and the vertical axis represents the imaginary part of the number,
bi.

:::: {#fs-id1165137938490 .note}
::: title
:::

How To

*Given a complex number a+bi, plot it in the complex plane.*

Label the horizontal axis as the

real

axis and the vertical axis as the

imaginary axis.

Plot the point in the complex plane by moving

a

units in the horizontal direction and

b

units in the vertical direction.
::::

::: {#Example_08_05_01 .example}
Plot the complex number 2−3i in the complex plane.

From the origin, move two units in the positive horizontal direction and
three units in the negative vertical direction. See [\#](#).

<figure id="Figure_08_05_001">

</figure>
:::

:::: {#fs-id1165135581219 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Plot the point 1+5i in the complex plane.
::::

# Finding the Absolute Value of a Complex Number {#fs-id1165137542524}

The first step toward working with a complex number in polar form is to
find the absolute value. The absolute value of a complex number is the
same as its magnitude, or \| z \|. It measures the distance from the
origin to a point in the plane. For example, the graph of z=2+4i, in
[\#](#), shows \| z \|.

<figure id="Figure_08_05_003">

</figure>

:::: {#fs-id1165134541127 .note}
::: title
Absolute Value of a Complex Number
:::

Given z=x+yi, a complex number, the absolute value of z is defined as

$$|z| = \sqrt{x^{2} + y^{2}}$$

It is the distance from the origin to the point ( x,y ).

Notice that the absolute value of a real number gives the distance of
the number from 0, while the absolute value of a complex number gives
the distance of the number from the origin, ( 0,0 ).
::::

::: {#Example_08_05_02 .example}
Find the absolute value of z= 5 −i.

Using the formula, we have

$$\begin{array}{l}
{|z| = \sqrt{x^{2} + y^{2}}} \\
{|z| = \sqrt{\left( \sqrt{5} \right)^{2} + \left( {- 1} \right)^{2}}} \\
{|z| = \sqrt{5 + 1}} \\
{|z| = \sqrt{6}}
\end{array}$$

See [\#](#).

<figure id="Figure_08_05_004">

</figure>
:::

:::: {#fs-id1165137461107 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Find the absolute value of the complex number z=12−5i.

13
::::

::: {#Example_08_05_03 .example}
Given z=3−4i, find \| z \|.

Using the formula, we have

$$\begin{array}{l}
{|z| = \sqrt{x^{2} + y^{2}}} \\
{|z| = \sqrt{(3)^{2} + \left( {- 4} \right)^{2}}} \\
{|z| = \sqrt{9 + 16}} \\
\begin{array}{l}
{|z| = \sqrt{25}} \\
{|z| = 5}
\end{array}
\end{array}$$

The absolute value z is 5. See [\#](#).

<figure id="Figure_08_05_005">

</figure>
:::

:::: {#fs-id1165137911592 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Given z=1−7i, find \| z \|.

\| z \|= 50 =5 2
::::

# Writing Complex Numbers in Polar Form {#fs-id1165135530150}

The polar form of a complex number expresses a number in terms of an
angle θ and its distance from the origin r. Given a complex number in
rectangular form expressed as z=x+yi, we use the same conversion
formulas as we do to write the number in trigonometric form:

$$\begin{array}{l}
{x = r\cos\;\theta} \\
{y = r\sin\;\theta} \\
{r = \sqrt{x^{2} + y^{2}}}
\end{array}$$

We review these relationships in [\#](#).

<figure id="Figure_08_05_006">

</figure>

We use the term *modulus* to represent the absolute value of a complex
number, or the distance from the origin to the point ( x,y ). The
modulus, then, is the same as r, the radius in polar form. We use θ to
indicate the angle of direction (just as with polar coordinates).
Substituting, we have

$$\begin{array}{l}
{z = x + yi} \\
{z = r\cos\;\theta + \left( {r\sin\;\theta} \right)i} \\
{z = r\left( {\cos\;\theta + i\sin\;\theta} \right)}
\end{array}$$

:::: {#fs-id1165135505465 .note}
::: title
Polar Form of a Complex Number
:::

a general note label

Writing a complex number in polar form involves the following conversion
formulas:

$$\begin{array}{l}
{x = r\cos\;\theta} \\
{y = r\sin\;\theta} \\
{r = \sqrt{x^{2} + y^{2}}}
\end{array}$$

Making a direct substitution, we have

$$\begin{array}{l}
{z = x + yi} \\
{z = \left( {r\cos\;\theta} \right) + i\left( {r\sin\;\theta} \right)} \\
{z = r\left( {\cos\;\theta + i\sin\;\theta} \right)}
\end{array}$$

where r is the modulus and θ is the argument. We often use the
abbreviation rcisθ to represent r( cosθ+isinθ ).
::::

::: {#Example_08_05_04 .example}
Express the complex number 4i using polar coordinates.

On the complex plane, the number z=4i is the same as z=0+4i. Writing it
in polar form, we have to calculate r first.

$$\begin{array}{l}
{r = \sqrt{x^{2} + y^{2}}} \\
{r = \sqrt{0^{2} + 4^{2}}} \\
{r = \sqrt{16}} \\
{r = 4}
\end{array}$$

Next, we look at x. If x=rcosθ, and x=0, then θ= π 2 . In polar
coordinates, the complex number z=0+4i can be written as z=4( cos( π 2
)+isin( π 2 ) ) or 4cis( π 2 ). See [\#](#).

<figure id="Figure_08_05_007">

</figure>
:::

:::: {#fs-id1165135175110 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Express z=3i as rcisθ in polar form.

z=3( cos( π 2 )+isin( π 2 ) )
::::

::: {#Example_08_05_05 .example}
Find the polar form of −4+4i.

First, find the value of r.

$$\begin{array}{l}
{r = \sqrt{x^{2} + y^{2}}} \\
{r = \sqrt{\left( {- 4} \right)^{2} + \left( 4^{2} \right)}} \\
{r = \sqrt{32}} \\
{r = 4\sqrt{2}}
\end{array}$$

Find the angle θ using the formula:

$$\begin{array}{l}
{\cos\;\theta = \frac{x}{r}} \\
{\cos\;\theta = \frac{- 4}{4\sqrt{2}}} \\
{\cos\;\theta = - \frac{1}{\sqrt{2}}} \\
{\theta = \cos^{- 1}\left( {- \frac{1}{\sqrt{2}}} \right) = \frac{3\pi}{4}}
\end{array}$$

Thus, the solution is 4 2 cis( 3π 4 ).
:::

:::: {#fs-id1165135475905 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Write z= 3 +i in polar form.

z=2( cos( π 6 )+isin( π 6 ) )
::::

# Converting a Complex Number from Polar to Rectangular Form {#fs-id1165135311667}

Converting a complex number from polar form to rectangular form is a
matter of evaluating what is given and using the distributive property.
In other words, given z=r( cosθ+isinθ ), first evaluate the
trigonometric functions cosθ and sinθ. Then, multiply through by r.

::: {#Example_08_05_06 .example}
Convert the polar form of the given complex number to rectangular form:

$$z = 12\left( {\cos\left( \frac{\pi}{6} \right) + i\sin\left( \frac{\pi}{6} \right)} \right)$$

We begin by evaluating the trigonometric expressions.

$$\cos\left( \frac{\pi}{6} \right) = \frac{\sqrt{3}}{2}\;\text{and}\;\sin\left( \frac{\pi}{6} \right) = \frac{1}{2}$$

After substitution, the complex number is

$$z = 12\left( {\frac{\sqrt{3}}{2} + \frac{1}{2}i} \right)$$

We apply the distributive property:

$$\begin{array}{l}
{z = 12\left( {\frac{\sqrt{3}}{2} + \frac{1}{2}i} \right)} \\
{\text{~~} = (12)\frac{\sqrt{3}}{2} + (12)\frac{1}{2}i} \\
{\text{~~} = 6\sqrt{3} + 6i}
\end{array}$$

The rectangular form of the given point in complex form is 6 3 +6i.
:::

::: {#Example_08_05_07 .example}
Find the rectangular form of the complex number given r=13 and tanθ= 5
12 . Assume the number is in the first quadrant.

If tanθ= 5 12 , and tanθ= y x , we first confirm r= x 2 + y 2 = 12 2 + 5
2 =13. We then find cosθ= x r and sinθ= y r .

$$\begin{array}{l}
{z = 13(\cos\;\theta + i\sin\;\theta)} \\
{= 13\left( {\frac{12}{13} + \frac{5}{13}i} \right)} \\
{= 12 + 5i}
\end{array}$$

The rectangular form of the given number in complex form is 12+5i.
:::

:::: {#fs-id1165135511380 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Convert the complex number to rectangular form:

$$z = 4\left( {\cos\frac{11\pi}{6} + i\sin\frac{11\pi}{6}} \right)$$

z=2 3 −2i
::::

# Finding Products of Complex Numbers in Polar Form {#fs-id1165134324933}

Now that we can convert complex numbers to polar form we will learn how
to perform operations on complex numbers in polar form. For the rest of
this section, we will work with formulas developed by French
mathematician Abraham De Moivre (1667-1754). These formulas have made
working with products, quotients, powers, and roots of complex numbers
much simpler than they appear. The rules are based on multiplying the
moduli and adding the arguments.

:::: {#fs-id1165137473607 .note}
::: title
Products of Complex Numbers in Polar Form
:::

If z 1 = r 1 (cos θ 1 +isin θ 1 ) and z 2 = r 2 (cos θ 2 +isin θ 2 ),
then the product of these numbers is given as:

$$\begin{array}{l}
{z_{1}z_{2} = r_{1}r_{2}\left\lbrack {\cos\left( {\theta_{1} + \theta_{2}} \right) + i\sin\left( {\theta_{1} + \theta_{2}} \right)} \right\rbrack} \\
{z_{1}z_{2} = r_{1}r_{2}\text{cis}\left( {\theta_{1} + \theta_{2}} \right)}
\end{array}$$

Notice that the product calls for multiplying the moduli and adding the
angles.
::::

::: {#Example_08_05_08 .example}
Find the product of z 1 z 2 , given z 1 =4(cos(80°)+isin(80°)) and z 2
=2(cos(145°)+isin(145°)).

Follow the formula

$$\begin{array}{l}
{z_{1}z_{2} = 4 \cdot 2\lbrack\cos(80{^\circ} + 145{^\circ}) + i\sin(80{^\circ} + 145{^\circ})\rbrack} \\
{z_{1}z_{2} = 8\lbrack\cos(225{^\circ}) + i\sin(225{^\circ})\rbrack} \\
{z_{1}z_{2} = 8\left\lbrack {\cos\left( \frac{5\pi}{4} \right) + i\sin\left( \frac{5\pi}{4} \right)} \right\rbrack} \\
{z_{1}z_{2} = 8\left\lbrack {- \frac{\sqrt{2}}{2} + i\left( {- \frac{\sqrt{2}}{2}} \right)} \right\rbrack} \\
{z_{1}z_{2} = - 4\sqrt{2} - 4i\sqrt{2}}
\end{array}$$
:::

# Finding Quotients of Complex Numbers in Polar Form {#fs-id1165137736474}

The quotient of two complex numbers in polar form is the quotient of the
two moduli and the difference of the two arguments.

:::: {#fs-id1165137892433 .note}
::: title
Quotients of Complex Numbers in Polar Form
:::

If z 1 = r 1 (cos θ 1 +isin θ 1 ) and z 2 = r 2 (cos θ 2 +isin θ 2 ),
then the quotient of these numbers is

$$\begin{array}{l}
{\frac{z_{1}}{z_{2}} = \frac{r_{1}}{r_{2}}\left\lbrack {\cos\left( {\theta_{1} - \theta_{2}} \right) + i\sin\left( {\theta_{1} - \theta_{2}} \right)} \right\rbrack,\quad z_{2} \neq 0} \\
{\frac{z_{1}}{z_{2}} = \frac{r_{1}}{r_{2}}\text{cis}\left( {\theta_{1} - \theta_{2}} \right),\quad z_{2} \neq 0\;}
\end{array}$$

Notice that the moduli are divided, and the angles are subtracted.
::::

:::: {#fs-id1165137897028 .note}
::: title
:::

How To

*Given two complex numbers in polar form, find the quotient.*

Divide

r

1

r

2

.

Find

θ

1

−

θ

2

.

Substitute the results into the formula:

z

=

r

(

cos

θ

\+

i

sin

θ

)

.

Replace

r

with

r

1

r

2

,

and replace

θ

with

θ

1

−

θ

2

.

Calculate the new trigonometric expressions and multiply through by

r

.
::::

::: {#Example_08_05_09 .example}
Find the quotient of z 1 =2(cos(213°)+isin(213°)) and z 2
=4(cos(33°)+isin(33°)).

Using the formula, we have

$$\begin{array}{l}
{\frac{z_{1}}{z_{2}} = \frac{2}{4}\lbrack\cos(213{^\circ} - 33{^\circ}) + i\sin(213{^\circ} - 33{^\circ})\rbrack} \\
{\frac{z_{1}}{z_{2}} = \frac{1}{2}\lbrack\cos(180{^\circ}) + i\sin(180{^\circ})\rbrack} \\
{\frac{z_{1}}{z_{2}} = \frac{1}{2}\lbrack - 1 + 0i\rbrack} \\
{\frac{z_{1}}{z_{2}} = - \frac{1}{2} + 0i} \\
{\frac{z_{1}}{z_{2}} = - \frac{1}{2}}
\end{array}$$
:::

:::: {#fs-id1165135593394 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Find the product and the quotient of z 1 =2 3 (cos(150°)+isin(150°)) and
z 2 =2(cos(30°)+isin(30°)).

z 1 z 2 =−4 3 ; z 1 z 2 =− 3 2 + 3 2 i
::::

# Finding Powers of Complex Numbers in Polar Form {#fs-id1165137673550}

Finding powers of complex numbers is greatly simplified using De
Moivre's Theorem. It states that, for a positive integer n, z n is found
by raising the modulus to the nth power and multiplying the argument by
n. It is the standard method used in modern mathematics.

:::: {#fs-id1165135388434 .note}
::: title
De Moivre's Theorem
:::

If z=r( cosθ+isinθ ) is a complex number, then

$$\begin{array}{l}
{z^{n} = r^{n}\left\lbrack {\cos\left( {n\theta} \right) + i\sin\left( {n\theta} \right)} \right\rbrack} \\
{z^{n} = r^{n}\text{cis}\left( {n\theta} \right)}
\end{array}$$

where n is a positive integer.
::::

::: {#Example_08_05_10 .example}
Evaluate the expression ( 1+i ) 5 using De Moivre's Theorem.

Since De Moivre's Theorem applies to complex numbers written in polar
form, we must first write ( 1+i ) in polar form. Let us find r.

$$\begin{array}{l}
{r = \sqrt{x^{2} + y^{2}}} \\
{r = \sqrt{(1)^{2} + (1)^{2}}} \\
{r = \sqrt{2}}
\end{array}$$

Then we find θ. Using the formula tanθ= y x gives

$$\begin{array}{l}
{\tan\;\theta = \frac{1}{1}} \\
{\tan\;\theta = 1} \\
{\theta = \frac{\pi}{4}}
\end{array}$$

Use De Moivre's Theorem to evaluate the expression.

$$\begin{array}{l}
{{(a + bi)}^{n} = r^{n}\lbrack\cos(n\theta) + i\sin(n\theta)\rbrack} \\
{{(1 + i)}^{5} = \left( \sqrt{2} \right)^{5}\left\lbrack {\cos\left( {5 \cdot \frac{\pi}{4}} \right) + i\sin\left( {5 \cdot \frac{\pi}{4}} \right)} \right\rbrack} \\
{{(1 + i)}^{5} = 4\sqrt{2}\left\lbrack {\cos\left( \frac{5\pi}{4} \right) + i\sin\left( \frac{5\pi}{4} \right)} \right\rbrack} \\
{{(1 + i)}^{5} = 4\sqrt{2}\left\lbrack {- \frac{\sqrt{2}}{2} + i\left( {- \frac{\sqrt{2}}{2}} \right)} \right\rbrack} \\
{{(1 + i)}^{5} = - 4 - 4i}
\end{array}$$
:::

# Finding Roots of Complex Numbers in Polar Form {#fs-id1165135204415}

To find the *n*th root of a complex number in polar form, we use the nth
Root Theorem or De Moivre's Theorem and raise the complex number to a
power with a rational exponent. There are several ways to represent a
formula for finding nth roots of complex numbers in polar form.

:::: {#fs-id1165135420398 .note}
::: title
The *n*th Root Theorem
:::

A General Note label

To find the nth root of a complex number in polar form, use the formula
given as

$$z^{\frac{1}{n}} = r^{\frac{1}{n}}\left\lbrack {\cos\left( {\frac{\theta}{n} + \frac{2k\pi}{n}} \right) + i\sin\left( {\frac{\theta}{n} + \frac{2k\pi}{n}} \right)} \right\rbrack$$

where k=0,1,2,3,\...,n−1. We add 2kπ n to θ n in order to obtain the
periodic roots.
::::

::: {#Example_08_05_11 .example}
Evaluate the cube roots of z=8( cos( 2π 3 )+isin( 2π 3 ) ).

We have

$$\begin{array}{l}
{z^{\frac{1}{3}} = 8^{\frac{1}{3}}\left\lbrack {\cos\left( {\frac{\frac{2\pi}{3}}{3} + \frac{2k\pi}{3}} \right) + i\sin\left( {\frac{\frac{2\pi}{3}}{3} + \frac{2k\pi}{3}} \right)} \right\rbrack} \\
{z^{\frac{1}{3}} = 2\left\lbrack {\cos\left( {\frac{2\pi}{9} + \frac{2k\pi}{3}} \right) + i\sin\left( {\frac{2\pi}{9} + \frac{2k\pi}{3}} \right)} \right\rbrack}
\end{array}$$

There will be three roots: k=0,1,2. When k=0, we have

$$z^{\frac{1}{3}} = 2\left( {\cos\left( \frac{2\pi}{9} \right) + i\sin\left( \frac{2\pi}{9} \right)} \right)$$

When k=1, we have

$$\begin{array}{l}
{z^{\frac{1}{3}} = 2\left\lbrack {\cos\left( {\frac{2\pi}{9} + \frac{6\pi}{9}} \right) + i\sin\left( {\frac{2\pi}{9} + \frac{6\pi}{9}} \right)} \right\rbrack\begin{array}{llll}
 & & & 
\end{array}\text{~~~~Add~}\frac{2(1)\pi}{3}\text{~to~each~angle.}} \\
{z^{\frac{1}{3}} = 2\left( {\cos\left( \frac{8\pi}{9} \right) + i\sin\left( \frac{8\pi}{9} \right)} \right)}
\end{array}$$

When k=2, we have

$$\begin{array}{ll}
{z^{\frac{1}{3}} = 2\left\lbrack {\cos\left( {\frac{2\pi}{9} + \frac{12\pi}{9}} \right) + i\sin\left( {\frac{2\pi}{9} + \frac{12\pi}{9}} \right)} \right\rbrack\begin{array}{llll}
 & & & 
\end{array}} & {\text{Add~}\frac{2(2)\pi}{3}\text{~to~each~angle.}} \\
{z^{\frac{1}{3}} = 2\left( {\cos\left( \frac{14\pi}{9} \right) + i\sin\left( \frac{14\pi}{9} \right)} \right)} & 
\end{array}$$

Remember to find the common denominator to simplify fractions in
situations like this one. For k=1, the angle simplification is

$$\begin{array}{l}
{\frac{\frac{2\pi}{3}}{3} + \frac{2(1)\pi}{3} = \frac{2\pi}{3}\left( \frac{1}{3} \right) + \frac{2(1)\pi}{3}\left( \frac{3}{3} \right)} \\
{= \frac{2\pi}{9} + \frac{6\pi}{9}} \\
{= \frac{8\pi}{9}}
\end{array}$$
:::

:::: {#fs-id1165135404709 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Find the four fourth roots of 16(cos(120°)+isin(120°)).

z 0 =2(cos(30°)+isin(30°))

z 1 =2(cos(120°)+isin(120°))

z 2 =2(cos(210°)+isin(210°))

z 3 =2(cos(300°)+isin(300°))
::::

:::: {#fs-id1165133361907 .note}
::: title
:::

Media

Access these online resources for additional instruction and practice
with polar forms of complex numbers.

The Product and Quotient of Complex Numbers in Trigonometric Form

De Moivre's Theorem
::::

# Key Concepts {#fs-id1165134129902}

Complex numbers in the form

a

\+

b

i

are plotted in the complex plane similar to the way rectangular
coordinates are plotted in the rectangular plane. Label the

x-

axis as the

real

axis and the

y-

axis as the

imaginary

axis. See

.

The absolute value of a complex number is the same as its magnitude. It
is the distance from the origin to the point:

\|

z

\|

=

a

2

\+

b

2

.

See

and

.

To write complex numbers in polar form, we use the formulas

x

=

r

cos

θ

,

y

=

r

sin

θ

,

and

r

=

x

2

\+

y

2

.

Then,

z

=

r

(

cos

θ

\+

i

sin

θ

)

.

See

and

.

To convert from polar form to rectangular form, first evaluate the
trigonometric functions. Then, multiply through by

r

.

See

and

.

To find the product of two complex numbers, multiply the two moduli and
add the two angles. Evaluate the trigonometric functions, and multiply
using the distributive property. See

.

To find the quotient of two complex numbers in polar form, find the
quotient of the two moduli and the difference of the two angles. See

.

To find the power of a complex number

z

n

,

raise

r

to the power

n

,

and multiply

θ

by

n

.

See

.

Finding the roots of a complex number is the same as raising a complex
number to a power, but using a rational exponent. See

.

# Section Exercises {#fs-id1165134370081}

## Verbal {#fs-id1165135613677}

A complex number is a+bi. Explain each part.

*a* is the real part, *b* is the imaginary part, and i= −1

What does the absolute value of a complex number represent?

How is a complex number converted to polar form?

Polar form converts the real and imaginary part of the complex number in
polar form using x=rcosθ and y=rsinθ.

How do we find the product of two complex numbers?

What is De Moivre's Theorem and what is it used for?

z n = r n ( cos( nθ )+isin( nθ ) ) It is used to simplify polar form
when a number has been raised to a power.

## Algebraic {#fs-id1165134183779}

For the following exercises, find the absolute value of the given
complex number.

5+​3i

−7+​i

5 2

−3−3i

2 −6i

38

2i

2.2−3.1i

14.45

For the following exercises, write the complex number in polar form.

2+2i

8−4i

4 5 cis( 333.4° )

− 1 2 − 1 2 ​i

3 +i

2cis( π 6 )

3i

For the following exercises, convert the complex number from polar to
rectangular form.

z=7cis( π 6 )

7 3 2 +i 7 2

z=2cis( π 3 )

z=4cis( 7π 6 )

−2 3 −2i

z=7cis( 25° )

z=3cis( 240° )

−1.5−i 3 3 2

z= 2 cis( 100° )

For the following exercises, find z 1 z 2 in polar form.

z 1 =2 3 cis( 116° ); z 2 =2cis( 82° )

4 3 cis( 198° )

z 1 = 2 cis( 205° ); z 2 =2 2 cis( 118° )

z 1 =3cis( 120° ); z 2 = 1 4 cis( 60° )

3 4 cis( 180° )

z 1 =3cis( π 4 ); z 2 =5cis( π 6 )

z 1 = 5 cis( 5π 8 ); z 2 = 15 cis( π 12 )

5 3 cis( 17π 24 )

z 1 =4cis( π 2 ); z 2 =2cis( π 4 )

For the following exercises, find z 1 z 2 in polar form.

z 1 =21cis( 135° ); z 2 =3cis( 65° )

7cis( 70° )

z 1 = 2 cis( 90° ); z 2 =2cis( 60° )

z 1 =15cis( 120° ); z 2 =3cis( 40° )

5cis( 80° )

z 1 =6cis( π 3 ); z 2 =2cis( π 4 )

z 1 =5 2 cis( π ); z 2 = 2 cis( 2π 3 )

5cis( π 3 )

z 1 =2cis( 3π 5 ); z 2 =3cis( π 4 )

For the following exercises, find the powers of each complex number in
polar form.

Find z 3 when z=5cis( 45° ).

125cis( 135° )

Find z 4 when z=2cis( 70° ).

Find z 2 when z=3cis( 120° ).

9cis( 240° )

Find z 2 when z=4cis( π 4 ).

Find z 4 when z=cis( 3π 16 ).

cis( 3π 4 )

Find z 3 when z=3cis( 5π 3 ).

For the following exercises, evaluate each root.

Evaluate the cube root of z when z=27cis( 240° ).

3cis( 80° ),3cis( 200° ),3cis( 320° )

Evaluate the square root of z when z=16cis( 100° ).

Evaluate the cube root of z when z=32cis( 2π 3 ).

2 4 3 cis( 2π 9 ),2 4 3 cis( 8π 9 ),2 4 3 cis( 14π 9 )

Evaluate the square root of z when z=32cis( π ).

Evaluate the square root of z when z=8cis( 7π 4 ).

2 2 cis( 7π 8 ),2 2 cis( 15π 8 )

## Graphical {#fs-id1165135586834}

For the following exercises, plot the complex number in the complex
plane.

2+4i

−3−3i

5−4i

−1−5i

3+2i

2i

−4

6−2i

−2+i

1−4i

## Technology {#fs-id1165132949979}

For the following exercises, find all answers rounded to the nearest
hundredth.

Use the rectangular to polar feature on the graphing calculator to
change 5+5i to polar form.

Use the rectangular to polar feature on the graphing calculator to
change 3−2i to polar form.

3.61 e −0.59i

Use the rectangular to polar feature on the graphing calculator to
change −3−8i to polar form.

Use the polar to rectangular feature on the graphing calculator to
change 4cis( 120° ) to rectangular form.

−2+3.46i

Use the polar to rectangular feature on the graphing calculator to
change 2cis( 45° ) to rectangular form.

Use the polar to rectangular feature on the graphing calculator to
change 5cis( 210° ) to rectangular form.

−4.33−2.50i

# 

argument

the angle associated with a complex number; the angle between the line
from the origin to the point and the positive real axis

De Moivre's Theorem

formula used to find the

n

th

power or

n

th roots of a complex number; states that, for a positive integer

n

,

z

n

is found by raising the modulus to the

n

th

power and multiplying the angles by

n

modulus

the absolute value of a complex number, or the distance from the origin
to the point

(

x

,

y

)

;

also called the amplitude

polar form of a complex number

a complex number expressed in terms of an angle

θ

and its distance from the origin

r

;

can be found by using conversion formulas

x

=

r

cos

θ

,

y

=

r

sin

θ

,

and

r

=

x

2

\+

y

2
