m49411

> In this section you will:
>
> Graph plane curves described by parametric equations by plotting
> points.
>
> Graph parametric equations.

38d919ed-1bee-4ae6-aed0-48285d870dab

While not every fan (or team manager) appreciates it, baseball and many
other sports have become dependent on analytics, which involve complex
data recording and quantitative evaluation used to understand and
predict behavior. The earliest influence of analytics was mostly
statistical; more recently, physics and other sciences have come into
play. Foremost among these is the focus on launch angle and exit
velocity, which when at certain values can almost guarantee a home run.
On the other hand, emphasis on launch angle and focusing on home runs
rather than overall hitting results in far more outs. Consider the
following situation: it is the bottom of the ninth inning, with two outs
and two players on base. The home team is losing by two runs. The batter
swings and hits the baseball at 140 feet per second and at an angle of
approximately 45° to the horizontal. How far will the ball travel? Will
it clear the fence for a game-winning home run? The outcome may depend
partly on other factors (for example, the wind), but mathematicians can
model the path of a projectile and predict approximately how far it will
travel using parametric equations. In this section, we'll discuss
parametric equations and some common applications, such as projectile
motion problems.

<figure id="Figure_08_07_001">

</figure>

# Graphing Parametric Equations by Plotting Points {#fs-id1165137566996}

In lieu of a graphing calculator or a computer graphing program,
plotting points to represent the graph of an equation is the standard
method. As long as we are careful in calculating the values,
point-plotting is highly dependable.

:::: {#fs-id1165135361790 .note}
::: title
:::

How To

*Given a pair of parametric equations, sketch a graph by plotting
points.*

Construct a table with three columns:

t

,

x

(

t

)

,

and

y

(

t

)

.

Evaluate

x

and

y

for values of

t

over the interval for which the functions are defined.

Plot the resulting pairs

(

x

,

y

)

.
::::

::: {#Example_08_07_01 .example}
Sketch the graph of the parametric equations x(t)= t 2 +1, y(t)=2+t.

Construct a table of values for t,x(t), and y(t), as in [\#](#), and
plot the points in a plane.

  t    x( t )= t 2 +1   y( t )=2+t
  ---- ---------------- ------------
  −5   26               −3
  −4   17               −2
  −3   10               −1
  −2   5                0
  −1   2                1
  0    1                2
  1    2                3
  2    5                4
  3    10               5
  4    17               6
  5    26               7

The graph is a parabola with vertex at the point ( 1,2 ), opening to the
right. See [\#](#).

<figure id="Figure_08_07_002">

</figure>

As values for t progress in a positive direction from 0 to 5, the
plotted points trace out the top half of the parabola. As values of t
become negative, they trace out the lower half of the parabola. There
are no restrictions on the domain. The arrows indicate direction
according to increasing values of t. The graph does not represent a
function, as it will fail the vertical line test. The graph is drawn in
two parts: the positive values for t, and the negative values for t.
:::

:::: {#fs-id1165134485685 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Sketch the graph of the parametric equations x= t , y=2t+3, 0≤t≤3.
::::

::: {#Example_08_07_02 .example}
Construct a table of values for the given parametric equations and
sketch the graph:

$$\begin{array}{l}
{x = 2\cos\; t} \\
{y = 4\sin\; t}
\end{array}$$

Construct a table like that in [\#](#) using angle measure in radians as
inputs for t, and evaluating x and y. Using angles with known sine and
cosine values for t makes calculations easier.

  t       x=2cost              y=4sint
  ------- -------------------- ---------------------
  0       x=2cos(0)=2          y=4sin(0)=0
  π 6     x=2cos( π 6 )= 3     y=4sin( π 6 )=2
  π 3     x=2cos( π 3 )=1      y=4sin( π 3 )=2 3
  π 2     x=2cos( π 2 )=0      y=4sin( π 2 )=4
  2π 3    x=2cos( 2π 3 )=−1    y=4sin( 2π 3 )=2 3
  5π 6    x=2cos( 5π 6 )=− 3   y=4sin( 5π 6 )=2
  π       x=2cos(π)=−2         y=4sin( π )=0
  7π 6    x=2cos( 7π 6 )=− 3   y=4sin( 7π 6 )=−2
  4π 3    x=2cos( 4π 3 )=−1    y=4sin( 4π 3 )=−2 3
  3π 2    x=2cos( 3π 2 )=0     y=4sin( 3π 2 )=−4
  5π 3    x=2cos( 5π 3 )=1     y=4sin( 5π 3 )=−2 3
  11π 6   x=2cos( 11π 6 )= 3   y=4sin( 11π 6 )=−2
  2π      x=2cos(2π)=2         y=4sin( 2π )=0

[\#](#) shows the graph.

<figure id="Figure_08_07_004">

</figure>

By the symmetry shown in the values of x and y, we see that the
parametric equations represent an ellipse. The ellipse is mapped in a
counterclockwise direction as shown by the arrows indicating increasing
t values.

We have seen that parametric equations can be graphed by plotting
points. However, a graphing calculator will save some time and reveal
nuances in a graph that may be too tedious to discover using only hand
calculations.

Make sure to change the mode on the calculator to parametric (PAR). To
confirm, the Y= window should show

$$\begin{matrix}
{X_{1T} =} \\
{Y_{1T} =}
\end{matrix}$$

instead of Y 1 =.
:::

:::: {#fs-id1165137934405 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Graph the parametric equations: x=5cost, y=3sint.
::::

#  {#fs-id1165137610977}

::: {#Example_08_07_03 .example}
Graph the parametric equations x=5cost and y=2sint. First, construct the
graph using data points generated from the parametric form. Then graph
the rectangular form of the equation. Compare the two graphs.

Construct a table of values like that in [\#](#).

  t    x=5cost            y=2sint
  ---- ------------------ ------------------
  0    x=5cos(0)=5        y=2sin(0)=0
  1    x=5cos(1)≈2.7      y=2sin(1)≈1.7
  2    x=5cos(2)≈−2.1     y=2sin(2)≈1.8
  3    x=5cos(3)≈−4.95    y=2sin(3)≈0.28
  4    x=5cos(4)≈−3.3     y=2sin(4)≈−1.5
  5    x=5cos(5)≈1.4      y=2sin(5)≈−1.9
  −1   x=5cos(−1)≈2.7     y=2sin(−1)≈−1.7
  −2   x=5cos(−2)≈−2.1    y=2sin(−2)≈−1.8
  −3   x=5cos(−3)≈−4.95   y=2sin(−3)≈−0.28
  −4   x=5cos(−4)≈−3.3    y=2sin(−4)≈1.5
  −5   x=5cos(−5)≈1.4     y=2sin(−5)≈1.9

Plot the ( x,y ) values from the table. See [\#](#).

<figure id="Figure_08_07_006">

</figure>

Next, translate the parametric equations to rectangular form. To do
this, we solve for t in either x( t ) or y( t ), and then substitute the
expression for t in the other equation. The result will be a function y(
x ) if solving for t as a function of x, or x(y) if solving for t as a
function of y.

$$\begin{array}{ll}
{x = 5\cos\; t} & \\
{\frac{x}{5} = \cos\; t} & {\text{Solve~for~}\cos\; t.} \\
{y = 2\sin\; t\begin{array}{llll}
 & & & 
\end{array}\mspace{9mu}} & {\text{Solve~for~}\sin\; t.} \\
{\frac{y}{2} = \sin\; t} & 
\end{array}$$

Then, use the Pythagorean Theorem.

$$\begin{array}{r}
{\cos^{2}t + \sin^{2}t = 1} \\
{\left( \frac{x}{5} \right)^{2} + \left( \frac{y}{2} \right)^{2} = 1} \\
{\frac{x^{2}}{25} + \frac{y^{2}}{4} = 1}
\end{array}$$

In [\#](#), the data from the parametric equations and the rectangular
equation are plotted together. The parametric equations are plotted in
blue; the graph for the rectangular equation is drawn on top of the
parametric in a dashed style colored red. Clearly, both forms produce
the same graph.

<figure id="Figure_08_07_007">

</figure>
:::

::: {#Example_08_07_04 .example}
Graph the parametric equations x=t+1 and y= t , t≥0, and the rectangular
equivalent y= x−1 on the same coordinate system.

Construct a table of values for the parametric equations, as we did in
the previous example, and graph y= t , t≥0 on the same grid, as in
[\#](#).

<figure id="Figure_08_07_008">

</figure>

With the domain on t restricted, we only plot positive values of t. The
parametric data is graphed in blue and the graph of the rectangular
equation is dashed in red. Once again, we see that the two forms
overlap.
:::

:::: {#fs-id1165137823949 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Sketch the graph of the parametric equations x=2cosθandy=4sinθ, along
with the rectangular equation on the same grid.

The graph of the parametric equations is in red and the graph of the
rectangular equation is drawn in blue dots on top of the parametric
equations.
::::

# Applications of Parametric Equations {#fs-id1165134181759}

Many of the advantages of parametric equations become obvious when
applied to solving real-world problems. Although rectangular equations
in *x* and *y* give an overall picture of an object\'s path, they do not
reveal the position of an object at a specific time. Parametric
equations, however, illustrate how the values of *x* and *y* change
depending on *t*, as the location of a moving object at a particular
time.

A common application of parametric equations is solving problems
involving projectile motion. In this type of motion, an object is
propelled forward in an upward direction forming an angle of θ to the
horizontal, with an initial speed of v 0 , and at a height h above the
horizontal.

The path of an object propelled at an inclination of θ to the
horizontal, with initial speed v 0 , and at a height h above the
horizontal, is given by

$$\begin{array}{l}
{x = (v_{0}\cos\theta)t\text{~~}} \\
{y = - \frac{1}{2}gt^{2} + (v_{0}\sin\theta)t + h}
\end{array}$$

where g accounts for the effects of gravity and h is the initial height
of the object. Depending on the units involved in the problem, use
g=32ft/ s 2 or g=9.8m/ s 2 . The equation for x gives horizontal
distance, and the equation for y gives the vertical distance.

:::: {#fs-id1165135469031 .note}
::: title
:::

How To

*Given a projectile motion problem, use parametric equations to solve.*

The horizontal distance is given by

x

=

(

v

0

cos

θ

)

t

.

Substitute the initial speed of the object for

v

0

.

The expression

cos

θ

indicates the angle at which the object is propelled. Substitute that
angle in degrees for

cos

θ

.

The vertical distance is given by the formula

y

=

−

1

2

g

t

2

\+

(

v

0

sin

θ

)

t

\+

h

.

The term

−

1

2

g

t

2

represents the effect of gravity. Depending on units involved, use

g

=

32

ft/s

2

or

g

=

9.8

m/s

2

.

Again, substitute the initial speed for

v

0

,

and the height at which the object was propelled for

h

.

Proceed by calculating each term to solve for

t

.
::::

::: {#Example_08_07_05 .example}
Solve the problem presented at the beginning of this section. Does the
batter hit the game-winning home run? Assume that the ball is hit with
an initial velocity of 140 feet per second at an angle of 45° to the
horizontal, making contact 3 feet above the ground.

ⓐ

Find the parametric equations to model the path of the baseball.

ⓑ

Where is the ball after 2 seconds?

ⓒ

How long is the ball in the air?

ⓓ

Is it a home run?

ⓐ

Use the formulas to set up the equations. The horizontal position is
found using the parametric equation for x. Thus,

$$\begin{array}{l}
{x = (v_{0}\cos\;\theta)t} \\
{x = (140\cos(45{^\circ}))t}
\end{array}$$

The vertical position is found using the parametric equation for y.
Thus,

$$\begin{array}{l}
{y = - 16t^{2} + (v_{0}\sin\;\theta)t + h} \\
{y = - 16t^{2} + (140\sin(45{^\circ}))t + 3}
\end{array}$$

ⓑ

Substitute 2 into the equations to find the horizontal and vertical
positions of the ball.

$$\begin{array}{l}
{x = (140\cos(45{^\circ}))(2)} \\
{x = 198\text{~feet}} \\
 \\
{y = - 16{(2)}^{2} + (140\sin(45{^\circ}))(2) + 3} \\
{y = 137\text{~feet}}
\end{array}$$

After 2 seconds, the ball is 198 feet away from the batter's box and 137
feet above the ground.

ⓒ

To calculate how long the ball is in the air, we have to find out when
it will hit ground, or when y=0. Thus,

$$\begin{array}{ll}
{y = - 16t^{2} + \left( {140\sin(45^{\circ})} \right)t + 3} & \\
{y = 0} & {\text{Set~}y(t) = 0\text{~and~solve~the~quadratic}.} \\
{t = 6.2173} & 
\end{array}$$

When t=6.2173 seconds, the ball has hit the ground. (The quadratic
equation can be solved in various ways, but this problem was solved
using a computer math program.)

ⓓ

We cannot confirm that the hit was a home run without considering the
size of the outfield, which varies from field to field. However, for
simplicity's sake, let's assume that the outfield wall is 400 feet from
home plate in the deepest part of the park. Let's also assume that the
wall is 10 feet high. In order to determine whether the ball clears the
wall, we need to calculate how high the ball is when *x* = 400 feet. So
we will set *x* = 400, solve for t, and input t into y.

$$\begin{matrix}
\begin{array}{l}
{x = \left( {140\cos(45{^\circ})} \right)t} \\
{400 = \left( {140\cos(45{^\circ})} \right)t} \\
{t = 4.04}
\end{array} \\
 \\
\begin{array}{l}
{y = - 16{(4.04)}^{2} + \left( {140\sin(45{^\circ})} \right)(4.04) + 3} \\
{y = 141.8}
\end{array}
\end{matrix}$$

The ball is 141.8 feet in the air when it soars out of the ballpark. It
was indeed a home run. See [\#](#).

<figure id="Figure_08_07_010">

</figure>
:::

:::: {#fs-id1165137842378 .note}
::: title
:::

Media

Access the following online resource for additional instruction and
practice with graphs of parametric equations.

Graphing Parametric Equations on the TI-84
::::

# Key Concepts {#fs-id1165137470285}

When there is a third variable, a third parameter on which

x

and

y

depend, parametric equations can be used.

To graph parametric equations by plotting points, make a table with
three columns labeled

t

,

x

(

t

)

,

and

y

(

t

)

.

Choose values for

t

in increasing order. Plot the last two columns for

x

and

y

.

See

and

.

When graphing a parametric curve by plotting points, note the associated

t

-values and show arrows on the graph indicating the orientation of the
curve. See

and

.

Parametric equations allow the direction or the orientation of the curve
to be shown on the graph. Equations that are not functions can be
graphed and used in many applications involving motion. See

.

Projectile motion depends on two parametric equations:

x

=

(

v

0

cos

θ

)

t

and

y

=

−

16

t

2

\+

(

v

0

sin

θ

)

t

\+

h

.

Initial velocity is symbolized as

v

0

.

θ

represents the initial angle of the object when thrown, and

h

represents the height at which the object is propelled.

# Section Exercises {#fs-id1165134283619}

## Verbal {#fs-id1165137851723}

What are two methods used to graph parametric equations?

plotting points with the orientation arrow and a graphing calculator

What is one difference in point-plotting parametric equations compared
to Cartesian equations?

Why are some graphs drawn with arrows?

The arrows show the orientation, the direction of motion according to
increasing values of t.

Name a few common types of graphs of parametric equations.

Why are parametric graphs important in understanding projectile motion?

The parametric equations show the different vertical and horizontal
motions over time.

## Graphical {#fs-id1165137788989}

For the following exercises, graph each set of parametric equations by
making a table of values. Include the orientation on the graph.

{ x( t )=t y( t )= t 2 −1

  ------- ---- ---- ---- --- --- ---
  *t*     −3   −2   −1   0   1   2
  *x*                            
  *y*                            
  ------- ---- ---- ---- --- --- ---

{ x( t )=t−1 y( t )= t 2

  ------- ---- ---- ---- --- --- ---
  *t*     −3   −2   −1   0   1   2
  *x*                            
  *y*                            
  ------- ---- ---- ---- --- --- ---

{ x( t )=2+t y( t )=3−2t

  ------- ---- ---- --- --- --- ---
  *t*     −2   −1   0   1   2   3
  *x*                           
  *y*                           
  ------- ---- ---- --- --- --- ---

{ x( t )=−2−2t y( t )=3+t

  ------- ---- ---- ---- --- ---
  *t*     −3   −2   −1   0   1
  *x*                        
  *y*                        
  ------- ---- ---- ---- --- ---

{ x( t )= t 3 y( t )=t+2

  ------- ---- ---- --- --- ---
  *t*     −2   −1   0   1   2
  *x*                       
  *y*                       
  ------- ---- ---- --- --- ---

{ x( t )= t 2 y( t )=t+3

  ------- ---- ---- --- --- ---
  *t*     −2   −1   0   1   2
  *x*                       
  *y*                       
  ------- ---- ---- --- --- ---

For the following exercises, sketch the curve and include the
orientation.

{ x(t)=t y(t)= t

{ x(t)=− t y(t)=t

{ x(t)=5−\| t \| y(t)=t+2

{ x(t)=−t+2 y(t)=5−\| t \|

{ x(t)=4sint y(t)=2cost

{ x(t)=2sint y(t)=4cost

{ x(t)=3 cos 2 t y(t)=−3sint

{ x(t)=3 cos 2 t y(t)=−3 sin 2 t

{ x(t)=sect y(t)=tant

{ x(t)=sect y(t)= tan 2 t

{ x(t)= 1 e 2t y(t)= e −t

For the following exercises, graph the equation and include the
orientation. Then, write the Cartesian equation.

{ x( t )=t−1 y( t )=− t 2

{ x( t )= t 3 y( t )=t+3

{ x(t)=2cost y(t)=−sint

{ x(t)=7cost y(t)=7sint

{ x(t)= e 2t y(t)=− e t

For the following exercises, graph the equation and include the
orientation.

x= t 2 ,y=3t,0≤t≤5

x=2t,y= t 2 ,−5≤t≤5

x=t, y= 25− t 2 , 0\<t≤5

x(t)=−t,y(t)= t , t≥0

x=−2cost, y=6sint, 0≤t≤π

x=−sect, y=tant, − π 2 \<t\< π 2

For the following exercises, use the parametric equations for integers
*a* and *b*:

$$\begin{array}{l}
{x(t) = a\cos((a + b)t)} \\
{y(t) = a\cos((a - b)t)}
\end{array}$$

Graph on the domain \[ −π,0 \], where a=2 and b=1, and include the
orientation.

Graph on the domain \[ −π,0 \], where a=3 and b=2 , and include the
orientation.

Graph on the domain \[ −π,0 \], where a=4 and b=3 , and include the
orientation.

Graph on the domain \[ −π,0 \], where a=5 and b=4 , and include the
orientation.

If a is 1 more than b, describe the effect the values of a and b have on
the graph of the parametric equations.

Describe the graph if a=100 and b=99.

There will be 100 back-and-forth motions.

What happens if b is 1 more than a? Describe the graph.

If the parametric equations x(t)= t 2 and y( t )=6−3t have the graph of
a horizontal parabola opening to the right, what would change the
direction of the curve?

Take the opposite of the x( t ) equation.

For the following exercises, describe the graph of the set of parametric
equations.

x(t)=− t 2 and y( t ) is linear

y(t)= t 2 and x( t ) is linear

The parabola opens up.

y(t)=− t 2 and x( t ) is linear

Write the parametric equations of a circle with center ( 0,0 ), radius
5, and a counterclockwise orientation.

{ x( t )=5cost y( t )=5sint

Write the parametric equations of an ellipse with center ( 0,0 ), major
axis of length 10, minor axis of length 6, and a counterclockwise
orientation.

For the following exercises, use a graphing utility to graph on the
window \[ −3,3 \] by \[ −3,3 \] on the domain \[0,2π) for the following
values of a and b , and include the orientation.
$$\left\{ \begin{array}{l}
{x(t) = \sin(at)} \\
{y(t) = \sin(bt)}
\end{array} \right.$$

a=1,b=2

a=2,b=1

a=3,b=3

a=5,b=5

a=2,b=5

a=5,b=2

## Technology {#fs-id1165133315097}

For the following exercises, look at the graphs that were created by
parametric equations of the form { x(t)=acos(bt) y(t)=csin(dt) . Use the
parametric mode on the graphing calculator to find the values of a,b,c,
and d to achieve each graph.

a=4, b=3, c=6, d=1

a=4, b=2, c=3, d=3

For the following exercises, use a graphing utility to graph the given
parametric equations. { x(t)=cost−1 y(t)=sint+t { x(t)=cost+t
y(t)=sint−1 { x( t )=t−sint y( t )=cost−1

Graph all three sets of parametric equations on the domain \[0, 2π\].

Graph all three sets of parametric equations on the domain \[ 0,4π \].

Graph all three sets of parametric equations on the domain \[ −4π,6π \].

The graph of each set of parametric equations appears to "creep" along
one of the axes. What controls which axis the graph creeps along?

Explain the effect on the graph of the parametric equation when we
switched sint and cost .

The y -intercept changes.

Explain the effect on the graph of the parametric equation when we
changed the domain.

## Extensions {#fs-id1165135606068}

An object is thrown in the air with vertical velocity of 20 ft/s and
horizontal velocity of 15 ft/s. The object's height can be described by
the equation y( t )=−16 t 2 +20t , while the object moves horizontally
with constant velocity 15 ft/s. Write parametric equations for the
object's position, and then eliminate time to write height as a function
of horizontal position.

y( x )=−16 ( x 15 ) 2 +20( x 15 )

A skateboarder riding on a level surface at a constant speed of 9 ft/s
throws a ball in the air, the height of which can be described by the
equation y( t )=−16 t 2 +10t+5. Write parametric equations for the
ball's position, and then eliminate time to write height as a function
of horizontal position.

For the following exercises, use this scenario: A dart is thrown upward
with an initial velocity of 64 ft/s at an angle of elevation of 52°.
Consider the position of the dart at any time t. Neglect air resistance.

Find parametric equations that model the problem situation.

{ x(t)=64tcos( 52° ) y(t)=−16 t 2 +64tsin( 52° )

Find all possible values of x that represent the situation.

When will the dart hit the ground?

approximately 3.2 seconds

Find the maximum height of the dart.

At what time will the dart reach maximum height?

1.6 seconds

For the following exercises, look at the graphs of each of the four
parametric equations. Although they look unusual and beautiful, they are
so common that they have names, as indicated in each exercise. Use a
graphing utility to graph each on the indicated domain.

An epicycloid: { x(t)=14cost−cos(14t) y(t)=14sint+sin(14t) on the domain
\[0,2π\] .

A hypocycloid: { x(t)=6sint+2sin(6t) y(t)=6cost−2cos(6t) on the domain
\[0,2π\] .

A hypotrochoid: { x(t)=2sint+5cos(6t) y(t)=5cost−2sin(6t) on the domain
\[0,2π\] .

A rose: { x(t)=5sin(2t)sint y(t)=5sin(2t)cost on the domain \[0,2π\] .
