m49439

> In this section, you will:
>
> Locate a hyperbola's vertices and foci.
>
> Write equations of hyperbolas in standard form.
>
> Graph hyperbolas centered at the origin.
>
> Graph hyperbolas not centered at the origin.
>
> Solve applied problems involving hyperbolas.

23e28179-8eb8-4790-a332-861509a3d9fb

#  {#eip-942}

## Learning Objectives {#eip-348}

Use the Distance Formula. (IA 11.1.1)

Graph a hyperbola with center at (0,0). (IA 11.4.1)

## Objective 1: Use the Distance Formula. (IA 11.1.1) {#eip-883}

:::: {#eip-idm473145248 .note}
::: title
Distance Formula
:::

Distance Formula: The distance *d* between two points x1, y1 and x2, y2
is d=x2-x12+y2-y12 .
::::

::: {#eip-360 .example}
Use the distance formula to find the distance between the points (−5,
−3) and (7,2).

  ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ------------------------
  Write the Distance Formula.                                                                    d=x2-x12+y2-y12
  Label the points (--5, --3) as (*x*1, *y*1) and point (7, 2) as (*x*2, *y*2) and substitute.   d= 72-(-5) 2 + 2-(-3)2
  Simplify.                                                                                      d=122+52 =144+55=169
                                                                                                 d=13
  ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ------------------------
:::

### Practice Makes Perfect {#eip-idm394934512}

Use the Distance Formula.

Use the Distance Formula to find the distance between the points (−2,−5)
and (−14,−10).

Use the Distance Formula to find the distance between the points (10,
−4) and (−1,5). Write the answer in exact form and then find the decimal
approximation, rounded to the nearest tenth if needed.

## Objective 2: Graph a hyperbola with center at (0,0). (IA 11.4.1) {#eip-318}

A hyperbola is all points in a plane where the difference of their
distances from two fixed points is constant. Each of the fixed points is
called a focus of the hyperbola.

The line through the foci is called the transverse axis. The two points
where the transverse axis intersects the hyperbola are each a vertex of
the hyperbola. The midpoint of the segment joining the foci is called
the center of the hyperbola. The line perpendicular to the transverse
axis that passes through the center is called the conjugate axis. Each
piece of the graph is called a branch of the hyperbola.

  ---------------- ------------------------------------------------------ -------------------------------------------------
  *Equation*       x2a2-y2b2=1                                            y2a2-x2b2=1
  *Orientation*    Transverse axis is horizontal. Opens right and left.   Transverse axis is vertical. Opens up and down.
  *Vertices*       (-a, 0), (a, 0)                                        (0, -a), (0, a)
  *x-intercepts*   (-a, 0), (a, 0)                                        none)
  *y-intercepts*   none                                                   (0, -a), (0, a)
  *Rectangle*      Use (±a,0), (0,±b)                                     Use (0,±a), (±b,0)
  *Asymptotes*     ( y=±bax                                               y=±abx
  ---------------- ------------------------------------------------------ -------------------------------------------------

  : The standard form of the equation of a hyperbola with center (0,0)
  {#eip-331}

*Notice* that, unlike the equation of an ellipse, the denominator of x2
is not always a2 and the denominator of y2 is not always b2 .

Notice that when the x2 term is positive, the transverse axis is on the
x-axis. When the y2 term is positive, the transverse axis is on the
y-axis.

:::: {#eip-684 .note}
::: title
How To Graph a hyperbola with center at (0, 0).
:::

Write the equation in standard form.

Determine if the transverse axis is horizontal or vertical.

Find the vertices.

Sketch the rectangle, entered at the origin, intersecting one axis at ±

a

and the other at ±

b

.

Sketch the asymptotes -- the lines through the diagonals of the
rectangle.

Draw the two branches of the hyperbola. Start at the vertex and use the
asymptotes as a guide.
::::

::: {#eip-710 .example}
Graph x 2 25 − y 2 4 = 1 .
:::

::: {#eip-482 .example}
Graph 4 y 2 − 16 x 2 = 64 .

  -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ------------------------------
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       4 y 2 − 16 x 2 = 64
  To write the equation in standard form, divide each term by 64 to make the equation equal to 1.                                                                                                                      4 y 2 64 − 16 x 2 64 = 64 64
  Simplify.                                                                                                                                                                                                            y 2 16 − x 2 4 = 1
  Since the *y* 2 -term is positive, the transverse axis is vertical. Since a 2 = 16 then a = ± 4 .                                                                                                                    
  The vertices are on the *y* -axis, ( 0 , − a ) , ( 0 , a ) . Since b 2 = 4 then b = ± 2 .                                                                                                                            ( 0 , −4 ) , ( 0 , 4 )
  Sketch the rectangle intersecting the *x* -axis at ( −2 , 0 ) , ( 2 , 0 ) and the *y* -axis at the vertices. Sketch the asymptotes through the diagonals of the rectangle. Draw the two branches of the hyperbola.   
  -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ------------------------------
:::

### Practice Makes Perfect {#eip-305}

Graph a hyperbola with center at (0,0).

Graph x29-y216=1 .

Graph 25y2-9x2=225 .

What do paths of comets, supersonic booms, ancient Grecian pillars, and
natural draft cooling towers have in common? They can all be modeled by
the same type of conic. For instance, when something moves faster than
the speed of sound, a shock wave in the form of a cone is created. A
portion of a conic is formed when the wave intersects the ground,
resulting in a sonic boom. See [\#](#).

<figure id="Figure_10_02_001">

</figure>

Most people are familiar with the sonic boom created by supersonic
aircraft, but humans were breaking the sound barrier long before the
first supersonic flight. The crack of a whip occurs because the tip is
exceeding the speed of sound. The bullets shot from many firearms also
break the sound barrier, although the bang of the gun usually supersedes
the sound of the sonic boom.

# Locating the Vertices and Foci of a Hyperbola {#fs-id2590621}

In analytic geometry, a hyperbola is a conic section formed by
intersecting a right circular cone with a plane at an angle such that
both halves of the cone are intersected. This intersection produces two
separate unbounded curves that are mirror images of each other. See
[\#](#).

<figure id="Figure_10_02_002">

</figure>

Like the ellipse, the hyperbola can also be defined as a set of points
in the coordinate plane. A hyperbola is the set of all points ( x,y ) in
a plane such that the difference of the distances between ( x,y ) and
the foci is a positive constant.

Notice that the definition of a hyperbola is very similar to that of an
ellipse. The distinction is that the hyperbola is defined in terms of
the *difference* of two distances, whereas the ellipse is defined in
terms of the *sum* of two distances.

As with the ellipse, every hyperbola has two axes of symmetry. The
transverse axis is a line segment that passes through the center of the
hyperbola and has vertices as its endpoints. The foci lie on the line
that contains the transverse axis. The conjugate axis is perpendicular
to the transverse axis and has the co-vertices as its endpoints. The
center of a hyperbola is the midpoint of both the transverse and
conjugate axes, where they intersect. Every hyperbola also has two
asymptotes that pass through its center. As a hyperbola recedes from the
center, its branches approach these asymptotes. The central rectangle of
the hyperbola is centered at the origin with sides that pass through
each vertex and co-vertex; it is a useful tool for graphing the
hyperbola and its asymptotes. To sketch the asymptotes of the hyperbola,
simply sketch and extend the diagonals of the central rectangle. See
[\#](#).

<figure id="Figure_10_02_003">

</figure>

In this section, we will limit our discussion to hyperbolas that are
positioned vertically or horizontally in the coordinate plane; the axes
will either lie on or be parallel to the *x*- and *y*-axes. We will
consider two cases: those that are centered at the origin, and those
that are centered at a point other than the origin.

## Deriving the Equation of a Hyperbola Centered at the Origin {#fs-id2092243}

Let ( −c,0 ) and ( c,0 ) be the foci of a hyperbola centered at the
origin. The hyperbola is the set of all points ( x,y ) such that the
difference of the distances from ( x,y ) to the foci is constant. See
[\#](#).

<figure id="Figure_10_02_013">

</figure>

If ( a,0 ) is a vertex of the hyperbola, the distance from ( −c,0 ) to (
a,0 ) is a−( −c )=a+c. The distance from ( c,0 ) to ( a,0 ) is c−a. The
difference of the distances from the foci to the vertex is

$$\left( {a + c} \right) - \left( {c - a} \right) = 2a$$

If ( x,y ) is a point on the hyperbola, we can define the following
variables:

$$\begin{array}{l}
{d_{2} = \text{the~distance~from~}\left( {- c,0} \right)\mspace{9mu}\text{to~}\left( {x,y} \right)} \\
{d_{1} = \text{the~distance~from~}\left( {c,0} \right)\mspace{9mu}\text{to~}\left( {x,y} \right)}
\end{array}$$

By definition of a hyperbola, d 2 − d 1 is constant for any point ( x,y
) on the hyperbola. We know that the difference of these distances is 2a
for the vertex (a,0). It follows that d 2 − d 1 =2a for any point on the
hyperbola. As with the derivation of the equation of an ellipse, we will
begin by applying the distance formula. The rest of the derivation is
algebraic. Compare this derivation with the one from the previous
section for ellipses.

$$\begin{array}{ll}
{\mspace{9mu}\text{~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~}d_{2} - d_{1} = \sqrt{{(x - ( - c))}^{2} + {(y - 0)}^{2}} - \sqrt{{(x - c)}^{2} + {(y - 0)}^{2}} = 2a} & \text{Distance~Formula} \\
{\sqrt{{(x + c)}^{2} + y^{2}} - \sqrt{{(x - c)}^{2} + y^{2}} = 2a} & {\text{Simplify~expressions}\text{.}} \\
{\mspace{9mu}\text{~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~}\sqrt{{(x + c)}^{2} + y^{2}} = 2a + \sqrt{{(x - c)}^{2} + y^{2}}} & {\text{Move~radical~to~opposite~side}\text{.}} \\
{\mspace{9mu}\text{~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~}{(x + c)}^{2} + y^{2} = \left( {2a + \sqrt{{(x - c)}^{2} + y^{2}}} \right)^{2}} & {\text{Square~both~sides}\text{.}} \\
{\mspace{9mu}\text{~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~}x^{2} + 2cx + c^{2} + y^{2} = 4a^{2} + 4a\sqrt{{(x - c)}^{2} + y^{2}} + {(x - c)}^{2} + y^{2}} & {\text{Expand~the~squares}\text{.}} \\
{\mspace{9mu}\text{~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~}x^{2} + 2cx + c^{2} + y^{2} = 4a^{2} + 4a\sqrt{{(x - c)}^{2} + y^{2}} + x^{2} - 2cx + c^{2} + y^{2}} & {\text{Expand~remaining~square}\text{.}} \\
{\mspace{9mu}\text{~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~}2cx = 4a^{2} + 4a\sqrt{{(x - c)}^{2} + y^{2}} - 2cx} & {\text{Combine~like~terms}\text{.}} \\
{\mspace{9mu}\text{~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~}4cx - 4a^{2} = 4a\sqrt{{(x - c)}^{2} + y^{2}}} & {\text{Isolate~the~radical}\text{.}} \\
{\mspace{9mu}\text{~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~}cx - a^{2} = a\sqrt{{(x - c)}^{2} + y^{2}}} & {\text{Divide~by~4}\text{.}} \\
{\mspace{9mu}\text{~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~}\left( {cx - a^{2}} \right)^{2} = a^{2}\left( \sqrt{{(x - c)}^{2} + y^{2}} \right)^{2}} & {\text{Square~both~sides}\text{.}} \\
{\mspace{9mu}\text{~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~}c^{2}x^{2} - 2a^{2}cx + a^{4} = a^{2}\left( {x^{2} - 2cx + c^{2} + y^{2}} \right)} & {\text{Expand~the~squares}\text{.}} \\
{\mspace{9mu}\text{~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~}c^{2}x^{2} - 2a^{2}cx + a^{4} = a^{2}x^{2} - 2a^{2}cx + a^{2}c^{2} + a^{2}y^{2}} & {\text{Distribute~}a^{2}\text{.}} \\
{\mspace{9mu}\text{~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~}a^{4} + c^{2}x^{2} = a^{2}x^{2} + a^{2}c^{2} + a^{2}y^{2}} & {\text{Combine~like~terms}\text{.}} \\
{\mspace{9mu}\text{~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~}c^{2}x^{2} - a^{2}x^{2} - a^{2}y^{2} = a^{2}c^{2} - a^{4}} & {\text{Rearrange~terms}\text{.}} \\
{\mspace{9mu}\text{~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~}x^{2}\left( {c^{2} - a^{2}} \right) - a^{2}y^{2} = a^{2}\left( {c^{2} - a^{2}} \right)} & {\text{Factor~common~terms}\text{.}} \\
{\mspace{9mu}\text{~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~}x^{2}b^{2} - a^{2}y^{2} = a^{2}b^{2}} & {\text{Set~}b^{2} = c^{2} - a^{2}.} \\
{\mspace{9mu}\text{~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~}\frac{x^{2}b^{2}}{a^{2}b^{2}} - \frac{a^{2}y^{2}}{a^{2}b^{2}} = \frac{a^{2}b^{2}}{a^{2}b^{2}}} & {\text{Divide~both~sides~by~}a^{2}b^{2}} \\
{\mspace{9mu}\text{~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~}\frac{x^{2}}{a^{2}} - \frac{y^{2}}{b^{2}} = 1} & 
\end{array}$$

This equation defines a hyperbola centered at the origin with vertices (
±a,0 ) and co-vertices ( 0±b ).

:::: {#fs-id1616384 .note}
::: title
Standard Forms of the Equation of a Hyperbola with Center (0,0)
:::

The standard form of the equation of a hyperbola with center ( 0,0 ) and
transverse axis on the *x*-axis is

$$\frac{x^{2}}{a^{2}} - \frac{y^{2}}{b^{2}} = 1$$

where

the length of the transverse axis is

2

a

the coordinates of the vertices are

(

±

a

,

0

)

the length of the conjugate axis is

2

b

the coordinates of the co-vertices are

(

0,

±

b

)

the distance between the foci is

2

c

,

where

c

2

=

a

2

\+

b

2

the coordinates of the foci are

(

±

c

,

0

)

the equations of the asymptotes are

y

=

±

b

a

x

See [\#](#)*a*.

The standard form of the equation of a hyperbola with center ( 0,0 ) and
transverse axis on the *y*-axis is

$$\frac{y^{2}}{a^{2}} - \frac{x^{2}}{b^{2}} = 1$$

where

the length of the transverse axis is

2

a

the coordinates of the vertices are

(

0,

±

a

)

the length of the conjugate axis is

2

b

the coordinates of the co-vertices are

(

±

b

,

0

)

the distance between the foci is

2

c

,

where

c

2

=

a

2

\+

b

2

the coordinates of the foci are

(

0,

±

c

)

the equations of the asymptotes are

y

=

±

a

b

x

See [\#](#)*b*.

Note that the vertices, co-vertices, and foci are related by the
equation c 2 = a 2 + b 2 . When we are given the equation of a
hyperbola, we can use this relationship to identify its vertices and
foci.
::::

<figure id="Figure_10_02_004">

</figure>

:::: {#fs-id2168213 .note}
::: title
:::

How To

*Given the equation of a hyperbola in standard form, locate its vertices
and foci.*

Determine whether the transverse axis lies on the

x

\- or

y

-axis. Notice that

a

2

is always under the variable with the positive coefficient. So, if you
set the other variable equal to zero, you can easily find the
intercepts. In the case where the hyperbola is centered at the origin,
the intercepts coincide with the vertices.

If the equation has the form

x

2

a

2

−

y

2

b

2

=

1

,

then the transverse axis lies on the

x

-axis. The vertices are located at

(

±

a

,

0

)

,

and the foci are located at

(

±

c

,

0

)

.

If the equation has the form

y

2

a

2

−

x

2

b

2

=

1

,

then the transverse axis lies on the

y

-axis. The vertices are located at

(

0

,

±

a

)

,

and the foci are located at

(

0,

±

c

)

.

Solve for

a

using the equation

a

=

a

2

.

Solve for

c

using the equation

c

=

a

2

\+

b

2

.
::::

::: {#Example_10_02_01 .example}
Identify the vertices and foci of the hyperbola with equation y 2 49 − x
2 32 =1.

The equation has the form y 2 a 2 − x 2 b 2 =1, so the transverse axis
lies on the *y*-axis. The hyperbola is centered at the origin, so the
vertices serve as the *y*-intercepts of the graph. To find the vertices,
set x=0, and solve for y.

$$\begin{array}{l}
{1 = \frac{y^{2}}{49} - \frac{x^{2}}{32}} \\
{1 = \frac{y^{2}}{49} - \frac{0^{2}}{32}} \\
{1 = \frac{y^{2}}{49}} \\
{y^{2} = 49} \\
{y = \pm \sqrt{49} = \pm 7}
\end{array}$$

The foci are located at ( 0,±c ). Solving for c,

$$c = \sqrt{a^{2} + b^{2}} = \sqrt{49 + 32} = \sqrt{81} = 9$$

Therefore, the vertices are located at ( 0,±7 ), and the foci are
located at ( 0,±9 ).
:::

:::: {#fs-id1160611 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Identify the vertices and foci of the hyperbola with equation x 2 9 − y
2 25 =1.

Vertices: ( ±3,0 ); Foci: ( ± 34 ,0 )
::::

# Writing Equations of Hyperbolas in Standard Form {#fs-id1557361}

Just as with ellipses, writing the equation for a hyperbola in standard
form allows us to calculate the key features: its center, vertices,
co-vertices, foci, asymptotes, and the lengths and positions of the
transverse and conjugate axes. Conversely, an equation for a hyperbola
can be found given its key features. We begin by finding standard
equations for hyperbolas centered at the origin. Then we will turn our
attention to finding standard equations for hyperbolas centered at some
point other than the origin.

## Hyperbolas Centered at the Origin {#fs-id1080687}

Reviewing the standard forms given for hyperbolas centered at ( 0,0 ),
we see that the vertices, co-vertices, and foci are related by the
equation c 2 = a 2 + b 2 . Note that this equation can also be rewritten
as b 2 = c 2 − a 2 . This relationship is used to write the equation for
a hyperbola when given the coordinates of its foci and vertices.

:::: {#fs-id1129556 .note}
::: title
:::

How To

*Given the vertices and foci of a hyperbola centered at ( 0,0 ), write
its equation in standard form.*

Determine whether the transverse axis lies on the

x

\- or

y

-axis.

If the given coordinates of the vertices and foci have the form

(

±

a

,

0

)

and

(

±

c

,

0

)

,

respectively, then the transverse axis is the

x

-axis. Use the standard form

x

2

a

2

−

y

2

b

2

=

1\.

If the given coordinates of the vertices and foci have the form

(

0,

±

a

)

and

(

0,

±

c

)

,

respectively, then the transverse axis is the

y

-axis. Use the standard form

y

2

a

2

−

x

2

b

2

=

1\.

Find

b

2

using the equation

b

2

=

c

2

−

a

2

.

Substitute the values for

a

2

and

b

2

into the standard form of the equation determined in Step 1.
::::

::: {#Example_10_02_02 .example}
What is the standard form equation of the hyperbola that has vertices (
±6,0 ) and foci ( ±2 10 ,0 )?

The vertices and foci are on the *x*-axis. Thus, the equation for the
hyperbola will have the form x 2 a 2 − y 2 b 2 =1.

The vertices are ( ±6,0 ), so a=6 and a 2 =36.

The foci are ( ±2 10 ,0 ), so c=2 10 and c 2 =40.

Solving for b 2 , we have

$$\begin{array}{ll}
{b^{2} = c^{2} - a^{2}} & \\
{b^{2} = 40 - 36} & {\begin{array}{llll}
 & & & 
\end{array}\text{Substitute~for~}c^{2}\mspace{9mu}\text{and~}a^{2}.} \\
{b^{2} = 4} & {\begin{array}{llll}
 & & & 
\end{array}\text{Subtract}.}
\end{array}$$

Finally, we substitute a 2 =36 and b 2 =4 into the standard form of the
equation, x 2 a 2 − y 2 b 2 =1. The equation of the hyperbola is x 2 36
− y 2 4 =1, as shown in [\#](#).

<figure id="Figure_10_02_014">

</figure>
:::

:::: {#fs-id2092263 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

What is the standard form equation of the hyperbola that has vertices (
0,±2 ) and foci ( 0,±2 5 )?

y 2 4 − x 2 16 =1
::::

## Hyperbolas Not Centered at the Origin {#fs-id1573575}

Like the graphs for other equations, the graph of a hyperbola can be
translated. If a hyperbola is translated h units horizontally and k
units vertically, the center of the hyperbola will be ( h,k ). This
translation results in the standard form of the equation we saw
previously, with x replaced by ( x−h ) and y replaced by ( y−k ).

:::: {#fs-id1674009 .note}
::: title
Standard Forms of the Equation of a Hyperbola with Center (*h*, *k*)
:::

The standard form of the equation of a hyperbola with center ( h,k ) and
transverse axis parallel to the *x*-axis is

$$\frac{\left( {x - h} \right)^{2}}{a^{2}} - \frac{\left( {y - k} \right)^{2}}{b^{2}} = 1$$

where

the length of the transverse axis is

2

a

the coordinates of the vertices are

(

h

±

a

,

k

)

the length of the conjugate axis is

2

b

the coordinates of the co-vertices are

(

h

,

k

±

b

)

the distance between the foci is

2

c

,

where

c

2

=

a

2

\+

b

2

the coordinates of the foci are

(

h

±

c

,

k

)

The asymptotes of the hyperbola coincide with the diagonals of the
central rectangle. The length of the rectangle is 2a and its width is
2b. The slopes of the diagonals are ± b a , and each diagonal passes
through the center ( h,k ). Using the point-slope formula, it is simple
to show that the equations of the asymptotes are y=± b a ( x−h )+k. See
[\#](#)*a*

The standard form of the equation of a hyperbola with center ( h,k ) and
transverse axis parallel to the *y*-axis is

$$\frac{\left( {y - k} \right)^{2}}{a^{2}} - \frac{\left( {x - h} \right)^{2}}{b^{2}} = 1$$

where

the length of the transverse axis is

2

a

the coordinates of the vertices are

(

h

,

k

±

a

)

the length of the conjugate axis is

2

b

the coordinates of the co-vertices are

(

h

±

b

,

k

)

the distance between the foci is

2

c

,

where

c

2

=

a

2

\+

b

2

the coordinates of the foci are

(

h

,

k

±

c

)

Using the reasoning above, the equations of the asymptotes are y=± a b (
x−h )+k. See [\#](#)*b*.
::::

<figure id="Figure_10_02_005">

</figure>

Like hyperbolas centered at the origin, hyperbolas centered at a point (
h,k ) have vertices, co-vertices, and foci that are related by the
equation c 2 = a 2 + b 2 . We can use this relationship along with the
midpoint and distance formulas to find the standard equation of a
hyperbola when the vertices and foci are given.

:::: {#fs-id1672636 .note}
::: title
:::

How To

*Given the vertices and foci of a hyperbola centered at ( h,k ), write
its equation in standard form.*

Determine whether the transverse axis is parallel to the

x

\- or

y

-axis.

If the

y

-coordinates of the given vertices and foci are the same, then the
transverse axis is parallel to the

x

-axis. Use the standard form

(

x

−

h

)

2

a

2

−

(

y

−

k

)

2

b

2

=

1\.

If the

x

-coordinates of the given vertices and foci are the same, then the
transverse axis is parallel to the

y

-axis. Use the standard form

(

y

−

k

)

2

a

2

−

(

x

−

h

)

2

b

2

=

1\.

Identify the center of the hyperbola,

(

h

,

k

)

,

using the midpoint formula and the given coordinates for the vertices.

Find

a

2

by solving for the length of the transverse axis,

2

a

, which is the distance between the given vertices.

Find

c

2

using

h

and

k

found in Step 2 along with the given coordinates for the foci.

Solve for

b

2

using the equation

b

2

=

c

2

−

a

2

.

Substitute the values for

h

,

k

,

a

2

,

and

b

2

into the standard form of the equation determined in Step 1.
::::

::: {#Example_10_02_03 .example}
What is the standard form equation of the hyperbola that has vertices at
(0,−2) and (6,−2) and foci at (−2,−2) and (8,−2)?

The *y*-coordinates of the vertices and foci are the same, so the
transverse axis is parallel to the *x*-axis. Thus, the equation of the
hyperbola will have the form

$$\frac{\left( {x - h} \right)^{2}}{a^{2}} - \frac{\left( {y - k} \right)^{2}}{b^{2}} = 1$$

First, we identify the center, ( h,k ). The center is halfway between
the vertices ( 0,−2 ) and ( 6,−2 ). Applying the midpoint formula, we
have

$$\left( {h,k} \right) = \left( {\frac{0 + 6}{2},\frac{-2 + (-2)}{2}} \right) = \left( {3,-2} \right)$$

Next, we find a 2 . The length of the transverse axis, 2a, is bounded by
the vertices. So, we can find a 2 by finding the distance between the
*x*-coordinates of the vertices.

$$\begin{array}{l}
{2a = \left| {0 - 6} \right|} \\
{2a = 6} \\
{\mspace{9mu}\ a = 3} \\
{a^{2} = 9}
\end{array}$$

Now we need to find c 2 . The coordinates of the foci are ( h±c,k ). So
( h−c,k )=( −2,−2 ) and ( h+c,k )=( 8,−2 ). We can use the
*x*-coordinate from either of these points to solve for c. Using the
point ( 8,−2 ), and substituting h=3,

$$\begin{array}{l}
{h + c = 8} \\
{3 + c = 8} \\
{\mspace{9mu}\text{~~~~~}c = 5} \\
{\mspace{9mu}\text{~~~}c^{2} = 25}
\end{array}$$

Next, solve for b 2 using the equation b 2 = c 2 − a 2 :

$$\begin{array}{l}
{b^{2} = c^{2} - a^{2}} \\
{\mspace{9mu}\text{~~~} = 25 - 9} \\
{\mspace{9mu}\text{~~~} = 16}
\end{array}$$

Finally, substitute the values found for h,k, a 2 , and b 2 into the
standard form of the equation.

$$\frac{{(x - 3)}^{2}}{9} - \frac{{(y + 2)}^{2}}{16} = 1$$
:::

:::: {#fs-id2115975 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

What is the standard form equation of the hyperbola that has vertices (
1,−2 ) and ( 1,8 ) and foci ( 1,−10 ) and ( 1,16 )?

( y−3 ) 2 25 - ( x−1 ) 2 144 =1
::::

# Graphing Hyperbolas Centered at the Origin {#fs-id1932906}

When we have an equation in standard form for a hyperbola centered at
the origin, we can interpret its parts to identify the key features of
its graph: the center, vertices, co-vertices, asymptotes, foci, and
lengths and positions of the transverse and conjugate axes. To graph
hyperbolas centered at the origin, we use the standard form x 2 a 2 − y
2 b 2 =1 for horizontal hyperbolas and the standard form y 2 a 2 − x 2 b
2 =1 for vertical hyperbolas.

:::: {#fs-id1405838 .note}
::: title
:::

How To

*Given a standard form equation for a hyperbola centered at ( 0,0 ),
sketch the graph.*

Determine which of the standard forms applies to the given equation.

Use the standard form identified in Step 1 to determine the position of
the transverse axis; coordinates for the vertices, co-vertices, and
foci; and the equations for the asymptotes.

If the equation is in the form

x

2

a

2

−

y

2

b

2

=

1

,

then

the transverse axis is on the

x

-axis

the coordinates of the vertices are

(

±

a

,

0

)

the coordinates of the co-vertices are

(

0,

±

b

)

the coordinates of the foci are

(

±

c

,

0

)

the equations of the asymptotes are

y

=

±

b

a

x

If the equation is in the form

y

2

a

2

−

x

2

b

2

=

1

,

then

the transverse axis is on the

y

-axis

the coordinates of the vertices are

(

0,

±

a

)

the coordinates of the co-vertices are

(

±

b

,

0

)

the coordinates of the foci are

(

0,

±

c

)

the equations of the asymptotes are

y

=

±

a

b

x

Solve for the coordinates of the foci using the equation

c

=

±

a

2

\+

b

2

.

Plot the vertices, co-vertices, foci, and asymptotes in the coordinate
plane, and draw a smooth curve to form the hyperbola.
::::

::: {#Example_10_02_04 .example}
Graph the hyperbola given by the equation y 2 64 − x 2 36 =1. Identify
and label the vertices, co-vertices, foci, and asymptotes.

The standard form that applies to the given equation is y 2 a 2 − x 2 b
2 =1. Thus, the transverse axis is on the *y*-axis

The coordinates of the vertices are ( 0,±a )=( 0,± 64 )=( 0,±8 )

The coordinates of the co-vertices are ( ±b,0 )=( ± 36 ,0 )=( ±6,0 )

The coordinates of the foci are ( 0,±c ), where c=± a 2 + b 2 . Solving
for c, we have

$$c = \pm \sqrt{a^{2} + b^{2}} = \pm \sqrt{64 + 36} = \pm \sqrt{100} = \pm 10$$

Therefore, the coordinates of the foci are ( 0,±10 )

The equations of the asymptotes are y=± a b x=± 8 6 x=± 4 3 x

Plot and label the vertices and co-vertices, and then sketch the central
rectangle. Sides of the rectangle are parallel to the axes and pass
through the vertices and co-vertices. Sketch and extend the diagonals of
the central rectangle to show the asymptotes. The central rectangle and
asymptotes provide the framework needed to sketch an accurate graph of
the hyperbola. Label the foci and asymptotes, and draw a smooth curve to
form the hyperbola, as shown in [\#](#).

<figure id="Figure_10_02_006">

</figure>
:::

:::: {#fs-id2123531 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Graph the hyperbola given by the equation x 2 144 − y 2 81 =1. Identify
and label the vertices, co-vertices, foci, and asymptotes.

vertices: ( ±12,0 ); co-vertices: ( 0,±9 ); foci: ( ±15,0 ); asymptotes:
y=± 3 4 x;
::::

# Graphing Hyperbolas Not Centered at the Origin {#fs-id2208483}

Graphing hyperbolas centered at a point ( h,k ) other than the origin is
similar to graphing ellipses centered at a point other than the origin.
We use the standard forms ( x−h ) 2 a 2 − ( y−k ) 2 b 2 =1 for
horizontal hyperbolas, and ( y−k ) 2 a 2 − ( x−h ) 2 b 2 =1 for vertical
hyperbolas. From these standard form equations we can easily calculate
and plot key features of the graph: the coordinates of its center,
vertices, co-vertices, and foci; the equations of its asymptotes; and
the positions of the transverse and conjugate axes.

:::: {#fs-id2135270 .note}
::: title
:::

How To

*Given a general form for a hyperbola centered at ( h, k ), sketch the
graph.*

Convert the general form to that standard form. Determine which of the
standard forms applies to the given equation.

Use the standard form identified in Step 1 to determine the position of
the transverse axis; coordinates for the center, vertices, co-vertices,
foci; and equations for the asymptotes.

If the equation is in the form

(

x

−

h

)

2

a

2

−

(

y

−

k

)

2

b

2

=

1

,

then

the transverse axis is parallel to the

x

-axis

the center is

(

h

,

k

)

the coordinates of the vertices are

(

h

±

a

,

k

)

the coordinates of the co-vertices are

(

h

,

k

±

b

)

the coordinates of the foci are

(

h

±

c

,

k

)

the equations of the asymptotes are

y

=

±

b

a

(

x

−

h

)

\+

k

If the equation is in the form

(

y

−

k

)

2

a

2

−

(

x

−

h

)

2

b

2

=

1

,

then

the transverse axis is parallel to the

y

-axis

the center is

(

h

,

k

)

the coordinates of the vertices are

(

h

,

k

±

a

)

the coordinates of the co-vertices are

(

h

±

b

,

k

)

the coordinates of the foci are

(

h

,

k

±

c

)

the equations of the asymptotes are

y

=

±

a

b

(

x

−

h

)

\+

k

Solve for the coordinates of the foci using the equation

c

=

±

a

2

\+

b

2

.

Plot the center, vertices, co-vertices, foci, and asymptotes in the
coordinate plane and draw a smooth curve to form the hyperbola.
::::

::: {#Example_10_02_05 .example}
Graph the hyperbola given by the equation 9 x 2 −4 y 2 −36x−40y−388=0.
Identify and label the center, vertices, co-vertices, foci, and
asymptotes.

Start by expressing the equation in standard form. Group terms that
contain the same variable, and move the constant to the opposite side of
the equation.

$$\left( {9x^{2} - 36x} \right) - \left( {4y^{2} + 40y} \right) = 388$$

Factor the leading coefficient of each expression.

$$9\left( {x^{2} - 4x} \right) - 4\left( {y^{2} + 10y} \right) = 388$$

Complete the square twice. Remember to balance the equation by adding
the same constants to each side.

$$9\left( {x^{2} - 4x + 4} \right) - 4\left( {y^{2} + 10y + 25} \right) = 388 + 36 - 100$$

Rewrite as perfect squares.

$$9\left( {x - 2} \right)^{2} - 4\left( {y + 5} \right)^{2} = 324$$

Divide both sides by the constant term to place the equation in standard
form.

$$\frac{\left( {x - 2} \right)^{2}}{36} - \frac{\left( {y + 5} \right)^{2}}{81} = 1$$

The standard form that applies to the given equation is ( x−h ) 2 a 2 −
( y−k ) 2 b 2 =1, where a 2 =36 and b 2 =81, or a=6 and b=9. Thus, the
transverse axis is parallel to the *x*-axis. It follows that:the center
of the ellipse is ( h,k )=( 2,−5 ) the coordinates of the vertices are (
h±a,k )=( 2±6,−5 ), or ( −4,−5 ) and ( 8,−5 ) the coordinates of the
co-vertices are ( h,k±b )=( 2,−5±9 ), or ( 2,−14 ) and ( 2,4 ) the
coordinates of the foci are ( h±c,k ), where c=± a 2 + b 2 . Solving for
c, we have

$$c = \pm \sqrt{36 + 81} = \pm \sqrt{117} = \pm 3\sqrt{13}$$

Therefore, the coordinates of the foci are ( 2−3 13 ,−5 ) and ( 2+3 13
,−5 ).

The equations of the asymptotes are y=± b a ( x−h )+k=± 3 2 ( x−2 )−5.

Next, we plot and label the center, vertices, co-vertices, foci, and
asymptotes and draw smooth curves to form the hyperbola, as shown in
[\#](#).

<figure id="Figure_10_02_008">

</figure>
:::

:::: {#fs-id1943352 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Graph the hyperbola given by the standard form of an equation ( y+4 ) 2
100 − ( x−3 ) 2 64 =1. Identify and label the center, vertices,
co-vertices, foci, and asymptotes.

center: ( 3,−4 ); vertices: ( 3,−14 ) and ( 3,6 ); co-vertices: ( −5,−4
); and ( 11,−4 ); foci: ( 3,−4−2 41 ) and ( 3,−4+2 41 ); asymptotes: y=±
5 4 ( x−3 )−4
::::

# Solving Applied Problems Involving Hyperbolas {#fs-id1673158}

As we discussed at the beginning of this section, hyperbolas have
real-world applications in many fields, such as astronomy, physics,
engineering, and architecture. The design efficiency of hyperbolic
cooling towers is particularly interesting. Cooling towers are used to
transfer waste heat to the atmosphere and are often touted for their
ability to generate power efficiently. Because of their hyperbolic form,
these structures are able to withstand extreme winds while requiring
less material than any other forms of their size and strength. See
[\#](#). For example, a 500-foot tower can be made of a reinforced
concrete shell only 6 or 8 inches wide!

<figure id="Figure_10_02_010">

</figure>

The first hyperbolic towers were designed in 1914 and were 35 meters
high. Today, the tallest cooling towers are in France, standing a
remarkable 170 meters tall. In [\#](#) we will use the design layout of
a cooling tower to find a hyperbolic equation that models its sides.

::: {#Example_10_02_06 .example}
The design layout of a cooling tower is shown in [\#](#). The tower
stands 179.6 meters tall. The diameter of the top is 72 meters. At their
closest, the sides of the tower are 60 meters apart.

<figure id="Figure_10_02_011">

</figure>

Find the equation of the hyperbola that models the sides of the cooling
tower. Assume that the center of the hyperbola---indicated by the
intersection of dashed perpendicular lines in the figure---is the origin
of the coordinate plane. Round final values to four decimal places.

We are assuming the center of the tower is at the origin, so we can use
the standard form of a horizontal hyperbola centered at the origin: x 2
a 2 − y 2 b 2 =1, where the branches of the hyperbola form the sides of
the cooling tower. We must find the values of a 2 and b 2 to complete
the model.

First, we find a 2 . Recall that the length of the transverse axis of a
hyperbola is 2a. This length is represented by the distance where the
sides are closest, which is given as 60 meters. So, 2a=60. Therefore,
a=30 and a 2 =900.

To solve for b 2 , we need to substitute for x and y in our equation
using a known point. To do this, we can use the dimensions of the tower
to find some point ( x,y ) that lies on the hyperbola. We will use the
top right corner of the tower to represent that point. Since the
*y*-axis bisects the tower, our *x*-value can be represented by the
radius of the top, or 36 meters. The *y*-value is represented by the
distance from the origin to the top, which is given as 79.6 meters.
Therefore,

$$\begin{array}{ll}
{\frac{x^{2}}{a^{2}} - \frac{y^{2}}{b^{2}} = 1} & {\begin{array}{llll}
 & & & 
\end{array}\text{Standard~form~of~horizontal~hyperbola}.} \\
{\mspace{9mu}\text{~~~~~~~~~}b^{2} = \frac{y^{2}}{\frac{x^{2}}{a^{2}} - 1}} & {\begin{array}{llll}
 & & & 
\end{array}\text{Isolate~}b^{2}} \\
{\mspace{9mu}\text{~~~~~~~~~~~~} = \frac{{(79.6)}^{2}}{\frac{{(36)}^{2}}{900} - 1}} & {\begin{array}{llll}
 & & & 
\end{array}\text{Substitute~for~}a^{2},x,\mspace{9mu}\text{and~}y} \\
{\mspace{9mu}\text{~~~~~~~~~~~~} \approx 14400.3636} & {\begin{array}{llll}
 & & & 
\end{array}\text{Round~to~four~decimal~places}}
\end{array}$$

The sides of the tower can be modeled by the hyperbolic equation

$$\frac{x^{2}}{900} - \frac{y^{2}}{14400.3636~} = 1,\text{or}\mspace{9mu}\mspace{9mu}\frac{x^{2}}{30^{2}} - \frac{y^{2}}{120.0015^{2}~} = 1$$
:::

:::: {#fs-id1669673 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

A design for a cooling tower project is shown in [\#](#). Find the
equation of the hyperbola that models the sides of the cooling tower.
Assume that the center of the hyperbola---indicated by the intersection
of dashed perpendicular lines in the figure---is the origin of the
coordinate plane. Round final values to four decimal places.

<figure id="Figure_10_02_012">

</figure>

The sides of the tower can be modeled by the hyperbolic equation. x 2
400 − y 2 3600 =1or  x 2 20 2 − y 2 60 2 =1.
::::

:::: {#fs-id2238408 .note}
::: title
:::

Media

Access these online resources for additional instruction and practice
with hyperbolas.

Conic Sections: The Hyperbola Part 1 of 2

Conic Sections: The Hyperbola Part 2 of 2

Graph a Hyperbola with Center at Origin

Graph a Hyperbola with Center not at Origin
::::

# Key Equations {#fs-id2238438}

  ------------------------------------------------------------------ ----------------------------------
  Hyperbola, center at origin, transverse axis on *x*-axis           x 2 a 2 − y 2 b 2 =1
  Hyperbola, center at origin, transverse axis on *y*-axis           y 2 a 2 − x 2 b 2 =1
  Hyperbola, center at (h,k), transverse axis parallel to *x*-axis   ( x−h ) 2 a 2 − ( y−k ) 2 b 2 =1
  Hyperbola, center at (h,k), transverse axis parallel to *y*-axis   ( y−k ) 2 a 2 − ( x−h ) 2 b 2 =1
  ------------------------------------------------------------------ ----------------------------------

# Key Concepts {#fs-id2168752}

A hyperbola is the set of all points

(

x

,

y

)

in a plane such that the difference of the distances between

(

x

,

y

)

and the foci is a positive constant.

The standard form of a hyperbola can be used to locate its vertices and
foci. See

.

When given the coordinates of the foci and vertices of a hyperbola, we
can write the equation of the hyperbola in standard form. See

and

.

When given an equation for a hyperbola, we can identify its vertices,
co-vertices, foci, asymptotes, and lengths and positions of the
transverse and conjugate axes in order to graph the hyperbola. See

and

.

Real-world situations can be modeled using the standard equations of
hyperbolas. For instance, given the dimensions of a natural draft
cooling tower, we can find a hyperbolic equation that models its sides.
See

.

# Section Exercises {#fs-id2227168}

## Verbal {#fs-id2227172}

Define a hyperbola in terms of its foci.

A hyperbola is the set of points in a plane the difference of whose
distances from two fixed points (foci) is a positive constant.

What can we conclude about a hyperbola if its asymptotes intersect at
the origin?

What must be true of the foci of a hyperbola?

The foci must lie on the transverse axis and be in the interior of the
hyperbola.

If the transverse axis of a hyperbola is vertical, what do we know about
the graph?

Where must the center of hyperbola be relative to its foci?

The center must be the midpoint of the line segment joining the foci.

## Algebraic {#fs-id2227219}

For the following exercises, determine whether the following equations
represent hyperbolas. If so, write in standard form.

3 y 2 +2x=6

x 2 36 − y 2 9 =1

yes x 2 6 2 − y 2 3 2 =1

5 y 2 +4 x 2 =6x

25 x 2 −16 y 2 =400

yes x 2 4 2 − y 2 5 2 =1

−9 x 2 +18x+ y 2 +4y−14=0

For the following exercises, write the equation for the hyperbola in
standard form if it is not already, and identify the vertices and foci,
and write equations of asymptotes.

x 2 25 − y 2 36 =1

x 2 5 2 − y 2 6 2 =1; vertices: ( 5,0 ),( −5,0 ); foci: ( 61 ,0 ),( − 61
,0 ); asymptotes: y= 6 5 x,y=− 6 5 x

x 2 100 − y 2 9 =1

y 2 4 − x 2 81 =1

y 2 2 2 − x 2 9 2 =1; vertices: ( 0,2 ),( 0,−2 ); foci: ( 0, 85 ),( 0,−
85 ); asymptotes: y= 2 9 x,y=− 2 9 x

9 y 2 −4 x 2 =1

( x−1 ) 2 9 − ( y−2 ) 2 16 =1

( x−1 ) 2 3 2 − ( y−2 ) 2 4 2 =1; vertices: ( 4,2 ),( −2,2 ); foci: (
6,2 ),( −4,2 ); asymptotes: y= 4 3 ( x−1 )+2,y=− 4 3 ( x−1 )+2

( y−6 ) 2 36 − ( x+1 ) 2 16 =1

( x−2 ) 2 49 − ( y+7 ) 2 49 =1

( x−2 ) 2 7 2 − ( y+7 ) 2 7 2 =1; vertices: ( 9,−7 ),( −5,−7 ); foci: (
2+7 2 ,−7 ),( 2−7 2 ,−7 ); asymptotes: y=x−9,y=−x−5

4 x 2 −8x−9 y 2 −72y+112=0

−9 x 2 −54x+9 y 2 −54y+81=0

( x+3 ) 2 3 2 − ( y−3 ) 2 3 2 =1; vertices: ( 0,3 ),( −6,3 ); foci: (
−3+3 2 ,1 ),( −3−3 2 ,1 ); asymptotes: y=x+6,y=−x

4 x 2 −24x−36 y 2 −360y+864=0

−4 x 2 +24x+16 y 2 −128y+156=0

( y−4 ) 2 2 2 − ( x−3 ) 2 4 2 =1; vertices: ( 3,6 ),( 3,2 ); foci: (
3,4+2 5 ),( 3,4−2 5 ); asymptotes: y= 1 2 ( x−3 )+4,y=− 1 2 ( x−3 )+4

−4 x 2 +40x+25 y 2 −100y+100=0

x 2 +2x−100 y 2 −1000y+2401=0

( y+5 ) 2 7 2 − ( x+1 ) 2 70 2 =1; vertices: ( −1,2 ),( −1,−12 ); foci:
( −1,−5+7 101 ),( −1,−5−7 101 ); asymptotes: y= 1 10 ( x+1 )−5,y=− 1 10
( x+1 )−5

−9 x 2 +72x+16 y 2 +16y+4=0

4 x 2 +24x−25 y 2 +200y−464=0

( x+3 ) 2 5 2 − ( y−4 ) 2 2 2 =1; vertices: ( 2,4 ),( −8,4 ); foci: (
−3+ 29 ,4 ),( −3− 29 ,4 ); asymptotes: y= 2 5 ( x+3 )+4,y=− 2 5 ( x+3
)+4

For the following exercises, find the equations of the asymptotes for
each hyperbola.

y 2 3 2 − x 2 3 2 =1

( x−3 ) 2 5 2 − ( y+4 ) 2 2 2 =1

y= 2 5 ( x−3 )−4,y=− 2 5 ( x−3 )−4

( y−3 ) 2 3 2 − ( x+5 ) 2 6 2 =1

9 x 2 −18x−16 y 2 +32y−151=0

y= 3 4 ( x−1 )+1,y=− 3 4 ( x−1 )+1

16 y 2 +96y−4 x 2 +16x+112=0

## Graphical {#fs-id1837961}

For the following exercises, sketch a graph of the hyperbola, labeling
vertices and foci.

x 2 49 − y 2 16 =1

x 2 64 − y 2 4 =1

y 2 9 − x 2 25 =1

81 x 2 −9 y 2 =1

( y+5 ) 2 9 − ( x−4 ) 2 25 =1

( x−2 ) 2 8 − ( y+3 ) 2 27 =1

( y−3 ) 2 9 − ( x−3 ) 2 9 =1

−4 x 2 −8x+16 y 2 −32y−52=0

x 2 −8x−25 y 2 −100y−109=0

− x 2 +8x+4 y 2 −40y+88=0

64 x 2 +128x−9 y 2 −72y−656=0

16 x 2 +64x−4 y 2 −8y−4=0

−100 x 2 +1000x+ y 2 −10y−2575=0

4 x 2 +16x−4 y 2 +16y+16=0

For the following exercises, given information about the graph of the
hyperbola, find its equation.

Vertices at ( 3,0 ) and ( −3,0 ) and one focus at ( 5,0 ).

x 2 9 − y 2 16 =1

Vertices at ( 0,6 ) and ( 0,−6 ) and one focus at ( 0,−8 ).

Vertices at ( 1,1 ) and ( 11,1 ) and one focus at ( 12,1 ).

( x−6 ) 2 25 − ( y−1 ) 2 11 =1

Center: ( 0,0 ); vertex: ( 0,−13 ); one focus: ( 0, 313 ).

Center: ( 4,2 ); vertex: ( 9,2 ); one focus: ( 4+ 26 ,2 ).

( x−4 ) 2 25 − ( y−2 ) 2 1 =1

Center: ( 3,5 ); vertex: ( 3,11 ); one focus: ( 3,5+2 10 ).

For the following exercises, given the graph of the hyperbola, find its
equation.

y 2 16 − x 2 25 =1

y 2 9 − ( x+1 ) 2 9 =1

( x+3 ) 2 25 − ( y+3 ) 2 25 =1

## Extensions {#fs-id1928188}

For the following exercises, express the equation for the hyperbola as
two functions, with y as a function of x. Express as simply as possible.
Use a graphing calculator to sketch the graph of the two functions on
the same axes.

x 2 4 − y 2 9 =1

y 2 9 − x 2 1 =1

y( x )=3 x 2 +1 ,y( x )=−3 x 2 +1

( x−2 ) 2 16 − ( y+3 ) 2 25 =1

−4 x 2 −16x+ y 2 −2y−19=0

y( x )=1+2 x 2 +4x+5 ,y( x )=1−2 x 2 +4x+5

4 x 2 −24x− y 2 −4y+16=0

## Real-World Applications {#fs-id1925589}

For the following exercises, a hedge is to be constructed in the shape
of a hyperbola near a fountain at the center of the yard. Find the
equation of the hyperbola and sketch the graph.

The hedge will follow the asymptotes y=xand y=−x, and its closest
distance to the center fountain is 5 yards.

x 2 25 − y 2 25 =1

The hedge will follow the asymptotes y=2xand y=−2x, and its closest
distance to the center fountain is 6 yards.

The hedge will follow the asymptotes y= 1 2 x and y=− 1 2 x, and its
closest distance to the center fountain is 10 yards.

x 2 100 − y 2 25 =1

The hedge will follow the asymptotes y= 2 3 x and y=− 2 3 x, and its
closest distance to the center fountain is 12 yards.

The hedge will follow the asymptotes y= 3 4 x and y=− 3 4 x, and its
closest distance to the center fountain is 20 yards.

x 2 400 − y 2 225 =1

For the following exercises, assume an object enters our solar system
and we want to graph its path on a coordinate system with the sun at the
origin and the x-axis as the axis of symmetry for the object\'s path.
Give the equation of the flight path of each object using the given
information.

The object enters along a path approximated by the line y=x−2 and passes
within 1 au (astronomical unit) of the sun at its closest approach, so
that the sun is one focus of the hyperbola. It then departs the solar
system along a path approximated by the line y=−x+2.

The object enters along a path approximated by the line y=2x−2 and
passes within 0.5 au of the sun at its closest approach, so the sun is
one focus of the hyperbola. It then departs the solar system along a
path approximated by the line y=−2x+2.

4(x-1)2-y22=16

The object enters along a path approximated by the line y=0.5x+2 and
passes within 1 au of the sun at its closest approach, so the sun is one
focus of the hyperbola. It then departs the solar system along a path
approximated by the line y=−0.5x−2.

The object enters along a path approximated by the line y= 1 3 x−1 and
passes within 1 au of the sun at its closest approach, so the sun is one
focus of the hyperbola. It then departs the solar system along a path
approximated by the line y=− 1 3 x+1.

( x−h ) 2 a2 - (y-k)2 b2 =(x-3)2-9y2=4

The object enters along a path approximated by the line y=3x−9 and
passes within 1 au of the sun at its closest approach, so the sun is one
focus of the hyperbola. It then departs the solar system along a path
approximated by the line y=−3x+9.

# 

center of a hyperbola

the midpoint of both the transverse and conjugate axes of a hyperbola

conjugate axis

the axis of a hyperbola that is perpendicular to the transverse axis and
has the co-vertices as its endpoints

hyperbola

the set of all points

(

x

,

y

)

in a plane such that the difference of the distances between

(

x

,

y

)

and the foci is a positive constant

transverse axis

the axis of a hyperbola that includes the foci and has the vertices as
its endpoints
