m49441

> In this section, you will:
>
> Identify nondegenerate conic sections given their general form
> equations.
>
> Use rotation of axes formulas.
>
> Write equations of rotated conics in standard form.
>
> Identify conics without rotating axes.

35cc5135-47da-41e2-8041-90f4e34c5210

#  {#eip-832}

## Learning Objectives {#eip-979}

Using rotation of axes formulas.

Identify conic sections by their equations. (IA 11.4.3)

## Objective 1: Using rotation of axes formulas. {#eip-78}

If a point ( x , y ) on the Cartesian plane is represented on a new
coordinate plane where the axes of rotation are formed by rotating an
angle θ from the positive *x* -axis, then the coordinates of the point
with respect to the new axes are ( x ′ , y ′ ) .

The following rotations of axes formulas define the relationship between
(*x*,*y*) and (*x*',*y*'):

$$\left\{ \begin{array}{l}
{x = x'\text{cos}\theta - y'\text{sin}\theta} \\
{y = x'\text{sin}\theta + y'\text{cos}\theta}
\end{array} \right.$$

:::: {#fs-howto1 .note}
::: title
:::

How To

*Given the equation of a conic, find a new representation after rotating
through an angle.*

Find

x

and

y

where

x

=

x

\'

cos

θ

\-

y

\'

sin

θ

y

=

x

\'

sin

θ

\+

y

\'

cos

θ

Substitute the expression for

x

and

y

into in the given equation, then simplify.

Write the equations with

x

′

and

y

′

in standard form.
::::

::: {#eip-554 .example}
Find a new representation of the given equation after rotating through
the given angle.

3x2+xy+3y2-5=0, θ=45º

+----------------------------------+--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Find x and y using the rotation  | x=x\'cosθ-y\'sinθy=x\'sinθ+y\'cosθ                                                   |
| of axes formulas, substitute     |                                                                                      |
| *θ*=45º.                         |                                                                                      |
+----------------------------------+--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
|                                  |   ------------------------- -------------------------                                |
|                                  |   x=x\'12-y\'12x=x\'-y\'2   y=x\'12-y\'12y=x\'-y\'2                                  |
|                                  |   ------------------------- -------------------------                                |
+----------------------------------+--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Substitute the expressions for x | 3x2+xy+3y2-5=0                                                                       |
| and y into the given equation    |                                                                                      |
| and simplify.                    |                                                                                      |
+----------------------------------+--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
|                                  | 3x\'-y\'22+x\'-y\'2x\'-y\'2+3x\'-y\'22-5=0                                           |
+----------------------------------+--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Foil each term.                  | 3( x\'2-2x\'y\'+y\'22) 2+ x\'2-y\'22+3 (x\'2-2x\'y\'+y\'22)-5=0                      |
+----------------------------------+--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Multiply by 2 to get rid of the  | 3( x\'2-2x\'y\'+y\'2 )2+ x\'2-y\'2+3( x\'2-2x\'y\'+y\'2)-10=0                        |
| fraction.                        |                                                                                      |
+----------------------------------+--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Combine like terms.              | 3x\'2-6x\'y\'+3y\'2+x\'2-y\'2+3x\'2+6x\'y\'+3y\'2-10=07x\'2+5y\'2-10=07x\'2+5y\'2=10 |
+----------------------------------+--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Write the equations              | Set equal to 1. 7x\'210 +5y\'210=1 x\'2107 +y\'22=1                                  |
| with  x′ and y′ in standard      |                                                                                      |
| form.                            |                                                                                      |
+----------------------------------+--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
:::

### Practice Makes Perfect {#eip-986}

Using rotation of axes formulas:

Find a new representation of the given equation after rotating through
the given angle. Use the steps outlined to assist you in your work.

4x2--xy+4y2-2=0, θ=45º

  ------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Find x and y using the rotation of axes formulas, substitute *θ*=45º.
  Substitute the expressions for x and y into the given equation and simplify.
  Write the equations with  x′ and y′ in standard form.
  ------------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Objective 2: Identify conic sections by their equations. (IA 11.4.3) {#eip-85}

We can identify a conic from its equations by looking at the signs and
coefficients of the variables that are squared.

  Conic         Characteristics of x 2 - and y 2 - terms                               Example
  ------------- ---------------------------------------------------------------------- ----------------------
  *Parabola*    Either x 2 OR y 2 . Only one variable is squared.                      x = 3 y 2 − 2 y + 1
  *Circle*      x 2 - and y 2 - terms have the same coefficients                       x 2 + y 2 = 49
  *Ellipse*     x 2 - and y 2 - terms have the *same* sign, different coefficients     4 x 2 + 25 y 2 = 100
  *Hyperbola*   x 2 - and y 2 - terms have *different* signs, different coefficients   25 y 2 − 4 x 2 = 100

::: {#eip-260 .example}
ⓐ x=-y2-2y+3 ⓑ 9y2-x2+18y-4x-4=0 ⓒ 9x2+25y2=225 ⓓ x2+y2-4x+10y-7=0

ⓐ x=-y2-2y+3 *Parabola*: only one variable is squared. ⓑ
9y2-x2+18y-4x-4=0 *Hyperbola*: x2 and y2 have *different* signs and
different coefficients. ⓒ 9x2+25y2=225 *Ellipse*: x2 and y2 have the
*same* signs and different coefficients. ⓓ x2+y2-4x+10y-7=0 *Circle*: x2
and y2 have the *same* signs and the *same* signs coefficients.
:::

### Practice Makes Perfect {#eip-463}

Identify conic sections by their equations.

x=-2y2-12y-16

x2+y2=9

16x2-4y2+64x-24y-36=0

16x2+36y2=576

As we have seen, conic sections are formed when a plane intersects two
right circular cones aligned tip to tip and extending infinitely far in
opposite directions, which we also call a *cone*. The way in which we
slice the cone will determine the type of conic section formed at the
intersection. A circle is formed by slicing a cone with a plane
perpendicular to the axis of symmetry of the cone. An ellipse is formed
by slicing a single cone with a slanted plane not perpendicular to the
axis of symmetry. A parabola is formed by slicing the plane through the
top or bottom of the double-cone, whereas a hyperbola is formed when the
plane slices both the top and bottom of the cone. See [\#](#).

<figure id="Figure_10_04_001">

</figure>

Ellipses, circles, hyperbolas, and parabolas are sometimes called the
nondegenerate conic sections, in contrast to the degenerate conic
sections, which are shown in [\#](#). A degenerate conic results when a
plane intersects the double cone and passes through the apex. Depending
on the angle of the plane, three types of degenerate conic sections are
possible: a point, a line, or two intersecting lines.

<figure id="Figure_10_04_002">

</figure>

# Identifying Nondegenerate Conics in General Form {#fs-id1741499}

In previous sections of this chapter, we have focused on the standard
form equations for nondegenerate conic sections. In this section, we
will shift our focus to the general form equation, which can be used for
any conic. The general form is set equal to zero, and the terms and
coefficients are given in a particular order, as shown below.

$$Ax^{2} + Bxy + Cy^{2} + Dx + Ey + F = 0$$

where A,B, and C are not all zero. We can use the values of the
coefficients to identify which type conic is represented by a given
equation.

You may notice that the general form equation has an xy term that we
have not seen in any of the standard form equations. As we will discuss
later, the xy term rotates the conic whenever B is not equal to zero.

  *Conic Sections*     *Example*
  -------------------- -----------------------
  ellipse              4 x 2 +9 y 2 =1
  circle               4 x 2 +4 y 2 =1
  hyperbola            4 x 2 −9 y 2 =1
  parabola             4 x 2 =9yor 4 y 2 =9x
  one line             4x+9y=1
  intersecting lines   ( x−4 )( y+4 )=0
  parallel lines       ( x−4 )( x−9 )=0
  a point              4 x 2 +4 y 2 =0
  no graph             4 x 2 +4 y 2 =−1

:::: {#fs-id1532180 .note}
::: title
General Form of Conic Sections
:::

A conic section has the general form

$$Ax^{2} + Bxy + Cy^{2} + Dx + Ey + F = 0$$

where A,B, and C are not all zero.

[\#](#) summarizes the different conic sections where B=0, and A and C
are nonzero real numbers. This indicates that the conic has not been
rotated.

  --------------- -------------------------------------------------------
  *ellipse*       A x 2 +C y 2 +Dx+Ey+F=0,A≠Cand AC\>0

  *circle*        A x 2 +C y 2 +Dx+Ey+F=0,A=C

  *hyperbola*     A x 2 −C y 2 +Dx+Ey+F=0or −A x 2 +C y 2 +Dx+Ey+F=0,
                  where A and C are positive

  *parabola*      A x 2 +Dx+Ey+F=0or C y 2 +Dx+Ey+F=0
  --------------- -------------------------------------------------------
::::

:::: {#fs-id1200060 .note}
::: title
:::

How To

*Given the equation of a conic, identify the type of conic.*

Rewrite the equation in the general form,

A

x

2

\+

B

x

y

\+

C

y

2

\+

D

x

\+

E

y

\+

F

=

0\.

Identify the values of

A

and

C

from the general form.

If

A

and

C

are nonzero, have the same sign, and are not equal to each other, then
the graph may be an ellipse.

If

A

and

C

are equal and nonzero and have the same sign, then the graph may be a
circle.

If

A

and

C

are nonzero and have opposite signs, then the graph may be a hyperbola.

If either

A

or

C

is zero, then the graph may be a parabola.

If *B* = 0, the conic section will have a vertical and/or horizontal
axes. If *B* does not equal 0, as shown below, the conic section is
rotated. Notice the phrase "may be" in the definitions. That is because
the equation may not represent a conic section at all, depending on the
values of *A*, *B*, *C*, *D*, *E*, and *F*. For example, the degenerate
case of a circle or an ellipse is a point: A x 2 +By2=0, when *A* and
*B* have the same sign. The degenerate case of a hyperbola is two
intersecting straight lines: A x 2 +By2=0, when A and B have opposite
signs. On the other hand, the equation, A x 2 +By2+1=0, when A and B are
positive does not represent a graph at all, since there are no real
ordered pairs which satisfy it.
::::

::: {#Example_10_04_01 .example}
Identify the graph of each of the following nondegenerate conic
sections.

ⓐ

4

x

2

−

9

y

2

\+

36

x

\+

36

y

−

125

=

0

ⓑ

9

y

2

\+

16

x

\+

36

y

−

10

=

0

ⓒ

3

x

2

\+

3

y

2

−

2

x

−

6

y

−

4

=

0

ⓓ

−

25

x

2

−

4

y

2

\+

100

x

\+

16

y

\+

20

=

0

ⓐ

Rewriting the general form, we have

A=4 and C=−9, so we observe that A and C have opposite signs. The graph
of this equation is a hyperbola.

ⓑ

Rewriting the general form, we have

A=0 and C=9. We can determine that the equation is a parabola, since A
is zero.

ⓒ

Rewriting the general form, we have

A=3 and C=3. Because A=C, the graph of this equation is a circle.

ⓓ

Rewriting the general form, we have

A=−25 and C=−4. Because AC\>0 and A≠C, the graph of this equation is an
ellipse.
:::

:::: {#fs-id2814436 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Identify the graph of each of the following nondegenerate conic
sections.

ⓐ

16

y

2

−

x

2

\+

x

−

4

y

−

9

=

0

ⓑ

16

x

2

\+

4

y

2

\+

16

x

\+

49

y

−

81

=

0

ⓐ

hyperbola

ⓑ

ellipse
::::

## Finding a New Representation of the Given Equation after Rotating through a Given Angle {#fs-id1319873}

Until now, we have looked at equations of conic sections without an xy
term, which aligns the graphs with the *x*- and *y*-axes. When we add an
xy term, we are rotating the conic about the origin. If the *x*- and
*y*-axes are rotated through an angle, say θ, then every point on the
plane may be thought of as having two representations: ( x,y ) on the
Cartesian plane with the original *x*-axis and *y*-axis, and ( x ′ , y ′
) on the new plane defined by the new, rotated axes, called the
*x\'*-axis and *y\'*-axis. See [\#](#).

<figure id="Figure_10_04_003">

</figure>

We will find the relationships between x and y on the Cartesian plane
with x ′ and y ′ on the new rotated plane. See [\#](#).

<figure id="Figure_10_04_004">

</figure>

The original coordinate *x*- and *y*-axes have unit vectors i and j .
The rotated coordinate axes have unit vectors i ′ and j ′ . The angle θ
is known as the angle of rotation. See [\#](#). We may write the new
unit vectors in terms of the original ones.

$$\begin{array}{l}
{i' = \cos\mspace{9mu}\theta i + \sin\mspace{9mu}\theta j} \\
{j' = - \sin\mspace{9mu}\theta i + \cos\mspace{9mu}\theta j}
\end{array}$$

<figure id="Figure_10_04_005">

</figure>

Consider a vector *u* in the new coordinate plane. It may be represented
in terms of its coordinate axes.

$$\begin{array}{ll}
{u = x'i' + y'j'} & \\
{u = x'(i\mspace{9mu}\cos\mspace{9mu}\theta + j\mspace{9mu}\sin\mspace{9mu}\theta) + y'( - i\mspace{9mu}\sin\mspace{9mu}\theta + j\mspace{9mu}\cos\mspace{9mu}\theta)} & {\begin{array}{llll}
 & & & 
\end{array}\text{Substitute}.} \\
{u = ix'\mspace{9mu}\cos\mspace{9mu}\theta + jx'\mspace{9mu}\sin\mspace{9mu}\theta - iy'\mspace{9mu}\sin\mspace{9mu}\theta + jy'\mspace{9mu}\cos\mspace{9mu}\theta} & {\begin{array}{llll}
 & & & 
\end{array}\text{Distribute}.} \\
{u = ix'\mspace{9mu}\cos\mspace{9mu}\theta - iy'\mspace{9mu}\sin\mspace{9mu}\theta + jx'\mspace{9mu}\sin\mspace{9mu}\theta + jy'\mspace{9mu}\cos\mspace{9mu}\theta} & {\begin{array}{llll}
 & & & 
\end{array}\text{Apply~commutative~property}.} \\
{u = (x'\mspace{9mu}\cos\mspace{9mu}\theta - y'\mspace{9mu}\sin\mspace{9mu}\theta)i + (x'\mspace{9mu}\sin\mspace{9mu}\theta + y'\mspace{9mu}\cos\mspace{9mu}\theta)j} & {\begin{array}{llll}
 & & & 
\end{array}\text{Factor~by~grouping}.}
\end{array}$$

Because u= x ′ i ′ + y ′ j ′ , we have representations of x and y in
terms of the new coordinate system.

$$\begin{matrix}
{x = x'\cos\mspace{9mu}\theta - y'\sin\mspace{9mu}\theta} \\
\text{and} \\
{y = x'\sin\mspace{9mu}\theta + y'\cos\mspace{9mu}\theta}
\end{matrix}$$

:::: {#fs-id1741266 .note}
::: title
Equations of Rotation
:::

If a point ( x,y ) on the Cartesian plane is represented on a new
coordinate plane where the axes of rotation are formed by rotating an
angle θ from the positive *x*-axis, then the coordinates of the point
with respect to the new axes are ( x ′ , y ′ ). We can use the following
equations of rotation to define the relationship between ( x,y ) and ( x
′ , y ′ ):

$$x = x'\cos\mspace{9mu}\theta - y'\sin\mspace{9mu}\theta$$

and

$$y = x'\sin\mspace{9mu}\theta + y'\cos\mspace{9mu}\theta$$
::::

:::: {#fs-id1355297 .note}
::: title
:::

How To

*Given the equation of a conic, find a new representation after rotating
through an angle.*

Find

x

and

y

where

x

=

x

′

cos

θ

−

y

′

sin

θ

and

y

=

x

′

sin

θ

\+

y

′

cos

θ

.

Substitute the expression for

x

and

y

into in the given equation, then simplify.

Write the equations with

x

′

and

y

′

in standard form.
::::

::: {#Example_10_04_02 .example}
Find a new representation of the equation 2 x 2 −xy+2 y 2 −30=0 after
rotating through an angle of θ=45°.

Find x and y, where x= x ′ cosθ− y ′ sinθ and y= x ′ sinθ+ y ′ cosθ.

Because θ=45°,

$$\begin{array}{l}
 \\
{x = x'\cos(45{^\circ}) - y'\sin(45{^\circ})} \\
{x = x'\left( \frac{1}{\sqrt{2}} \right) - y'\left( \frac{1}{\sqrt{2}} \right)} \\
{x = \frac{x' - y'}{\sqrt{2}}}
\end{array}$$

and

$$\begin{array}{l}
 \\
\begin{array}{l}
{y = x'\sin(45{^\circ}) + y'\cos(45{^\circ})} \\
{y = x'\left( \frac{1}{\sqrt{2}} \right) + y'\left( \frac{1}{\sqrt{2}} \right)} \\
{y = \frac{x' + y'}{\sqrt{2}}}
\end{array}
\end{array}$$

Substitute x= x ′ cosθ− y ′ sinθ and y= x ′ sinθ+ y ′ cosθ into 2 x 2
−xy+2 y 2 −30=0.

$$2\left( \frac{x' - y'}{\sqrt{2}} \right)^{2} - \left( \frac{x' - y'}{\sqrt{2}} \right)\left( \frac{x' + y'}{\sqrt{2}} \right) + 2\left( \frac{x' + y'}{\sqrt{2}} \right)^{2} - 30 = 0$$

Simplify.

$$\begin{array}{ll}
{\cancel{2}\frac{(x' - y')(x' - y')}{\cancel{2}} - \frac{(x' - y')(x' + y')}{2} + \cancel{2}\frac{(x' + y')(x' + y')}{\cancel{2}} - 30 = 0} & {\begin{array}{llll}
 & & & 
\end{array}\text{FOIL~method}} \\
{\mspace{9mu}\text{~~~~~~~~~~}x'{}^{2}\cancel{- 2x'y}' + y'{}^{2} - \frac{(x'{}^{2} - y'{}^{2})}{2} + x'{}^{2}\cancel{+ 2x'y'} + y'{}^{2} - 30 = 0} & {\begin{array}{llll}
 & & & 
\end{array}\text{Combine~like~terms}.} \\
{\mspace{9mu}\text{~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~}2x'{}^{2} + 2y'{}^{2} - \frac{(x'{}^{2} - y'{}^{2})}{2} = 30} & {\begin{array}{llll}
 & & & 
\end{array}\text{Combine~like~terms}.} \\
{\mspace{9mu}\text{~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~}2\left( {2x'{}^{2} + 2y'{}^{2} - \frac{(x'{}^{2} - y'{}^{2})}{2}} \right) = 2(30)} & {\begin{array}{llll}
 & & & 
\end{array}\text{Multiply~both~sides~by~2}.} \\
{\mspace{9mu}\text{~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~}4x'{}^{2} + 4y'{}^{2} - (x'{}^{2} - y'{}^{2}) = 60} & {\begin{array}{llll}
 & & & 
\end{array}\text{Simplify}.} \\
{\mspace{9mu}\text{~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~}4x'{}^{2} + 4y'{}^{2} - x'{}^{2} + y'{}^{2} = 60} & {\begin{array}{llll}
 & & & 
\end{array}\text{Distribute}.} \\
{\mspace{9mu}\text{~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~}\frac{3x'{}^{2}}{60} + \frac{5y'{}^{2}}{60} = \frac{60}{60}} & {\begin{array}{llll}
 & & & 
\end{array}\text{Set~equal~to~1}.}
\end{array}$$

Write the equations with x ′ and y ′ in the standard form.

$$\frac{{x'}^{2}}{20} + \frac{{y'}^{2}}{12} = 1$$

This equation is an ellipse. [\#](#) shows the graph.

<figure id="Figure_10_04_006">

</figure>
:::

# Writing Equations of Rotated Conics in Standard Form {#fs-id1194834}

Now that we can find the standard form of a conic when we are given an
angle of rotation, we will learn how to transform the equation of a
conic given in the form A x 2 +Bxy+C y 2 +Dx+Ey+F=0 into standard form
by rotating the axes. To do so, we will rewrite the general form as an
equation in the x ′ and y ′ coordinate system without the x ′ y ′ term,
by rotating the axes by a measure of θ that satisfies

$$\cot\left( {2\theta} \right) = \frac{A - C}{B}$$

We have learned already that any conic may be represented by the second
degree equation

$$Ax^{2} + Bxy + Cy^{2} + Dx + Ey + F = 0$$

where A,B, and C are not all zero. However, if B≠0, then we have an xy
term that prevents us from rewriting the equation in standard form. To
eliminate it, we can rotate the axes by an acute angle θ where cot( 2θ
)= A−C B . If cot(2θ)\>0, then 2θ is in the first quadrant, and θ is
between (0°,45°). If cot(2θ)\<0, then 2θ is in the second quadrant, and
θ is between (45°,90°). If A=C, then θ=45°.

:::: {#fs-id1503870 .note}
::: title
:::

How To

*Given an equation for a conic in the x ′ y ′ system, rewrite the
equation without the x ′ y ′ term in terms of x ′ and y ′ , where the x
′ and y ′ axes are rotations of the standard axes by θ degrees.*

Find

cot

(

2

θ

)

.

Find

sin

θ

and

cos

θ

.

Substitute

sin

θ

and

cos

θ

into

x

=

x

′

cos

θ

−

y

′

sin

θ

and

y

=

x

′

sin

θ

\+

y

′

cos

θ

.

Substitute the expression for

x

and

y

into in the given equation, and then simplify.

Write the equations with

x

′

and

y

′

in the standard form with respect to the rotated axes.
::::

::: {#Example_10_04_03 .example}
Rewrite the equation 8 x 2 −12xy+17 y 2 =20 in the x ′ y ′ system
without an x ′ y ′ term.

First, we find cot(2θ). See [\#](#).

$$\begin{array}{l}
{8x^{2} - 12xy + 17y^{2} = 20\Rightarrow A = 8,\mspace{9mu} B = - 12\mspace{9mu}\text{and}\mspace{9mu} C = 17} \\
{\mspace{9mu}\text{~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~}\mspace{9mu}\mspace{9mu}\mspace{9mu}\cot(2\theta) = \frac{A - C}{B} = \frac{8 - 17}{- 12}} \\
{\mspace{9mu}\text{~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~}\mspace{9mu}\mspace{9mu}\mspace{9mu}\cot(2\theta) = \frac{- 9}{- 12} = \frac{3}{4}}
\end{array}$$

<figure id="Figure_10_04_007">

</figure>

$$\cot\left( {2\theta} \right) = \frac{3}{4} = \frac{\text{adjacent}}{\text{opposite}}$$

So the hypotenuse is

$$\begin{array}{r}
{3^{2} + 4^{2} = h^{2}} \\
{9 + 16 = h^{2}} \\
{25 = h^{2}} \\
{h = 5\mspace{9mu}\mspace{9mu}\mspace{9mu}}
\end{array}$$

Next, we find sinθ and cosθ.

$$\begin{array}{l}
\begin{array}{l}
 \\
 \\
{\sin\mspace{9mu}\theta = \sqrt{\frac{1 - \cos(2\theta)}{2}} = \sqrt{\frac{1 - \frac{3}{5}}{2}} = \sqrt{\frac{\frac{5}{5} - \frac{3}{5}}{2}} = \sqrt{\frac{5 - 3}{5} \cdot \frac{1}{2}} = \sqrt{\frac{2}{10}} = \sqrt{\frac{1}{5}}}
\end{array} \\
{\sin\mspace{9mu}\theta = \frac{1}{\sqrt{5}}} \\
{\cos\mspace{9mu}\theta = \sqrt{\frac{1 + \cos(2\theta)}{2}} = \sqrt{\frac{1 + \frac{3}{5}}{2}} = \sqrt{\frac{\frac{5}{5} + \frac{3}{5}}{2}} = \sqrt{\frac{5 + 3}{5} \cdot \frac{1}{2}} = \sqrt{\frac{8}{10}} = \sqrt{\frac{4}{5}}} \\
{\cos\mspace{9mu}\theta = \frac{2}{\sqrt{5}}}
\end{array}$$

Substitute the values of sinθ and cosθ into x= x ′ cosθ− y ′ sinθ and y=
x ′ sinθ+ y ′ cosθ.

$$\begin{array}{l}
 \\
\begin{array}{l}
{x = x'\cos\mspace{9mu}\theta - y'\sin\mspace{9mu}\theta} \\
{x = x'\left( \frac{2}{\sqrt{5}} \right) - y'\left( \frac{1}{\sqrt{5}} \right)} \\
{x = \frac{2x' - y'}{\sqrt{5}}}
\end{array}
\end{array}$$

and

$$\begin{array}{l}
\begin{array}{l}
 \\
{y = x'\sin\mspace{9mu}\theta + y'\cos\mspace{9mu}\theta}
\end{array} \\
{y = x'\left( \frac{1}{\sqrt{5}} \right) + y'\left( \frac{2}{\sqrt{5}} \right)} \\
{y = \frac{x' + 2y'}{\sqrt{5}}}
\end{array}$$

Substitute the expressions for x and y into in the given equation, and
then simplify.

$$\begin{array}{l}
{\mspace{9mu}\text{~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~}8\left( \frac{2x' - y'}{\sqrt{5}} \right)^{2} - 12\left( \frac{2x' - y'}{\sqrt{5}} \right)\left( \frac{x' + 2y'}{\sqrt{5}} \right) + 17\left( \frac{x' + 2y'}{\sqrt{5}} \right)^{2} = 20\mspace{9mu}\text{~~~}} \\
{\mspace{9mu} 8\left( \frac{(2x' - y')(2x' - y')}{5} \right) - 12\left( \frac{(2x' - y')(x' + 2y')}{5} \right) + 17\left( \frac{(x' + 2y')(x' + 2y')}{5} \right) = 20\mspace{9mu}\text{~~~}} \\
{\mspace{9mu}\text{~~}8\left( {4x'{}^{2} - 4x'y' + y'{}^{2}} \right) - 12\left( {2x'{}^{2} + 3x'y' - 2y'{}^{2}} \right) + 17\left( {x'{}^{2} + 4x'y' + 4y'{}^{2}} \right) = 100} \\
{32x'{}^{2} - 32x'y' + 8y'{}^{2} - 24x'{}^{2} - 36x'y' + 24y'{}^{2} + 17x'{}^{2} + 68x'y' + 68y'{}^{2} = 100} \\
{\mspace{9mu}\text{~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~}25x'{}^{2} + 100y'{}^{2} = 100\mspace{9mu}\ } \\
{\mspace{9mu}\text{~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~}\frac{25}{100}x'{}^{2} + \frac{100}{100}y'{}^{2} = \frac{100}{100}~}
\end{array}$$

Write the equations with x ′ and y ′ in the standard form with respect
to the new coordinate system.

$$\frac{{x'}^{2}}{4} + \frac{{y'}^{2}}{1} = 1$$

[\#](#) shows the graph of the ellipse.

<figure id="Figure_10_04_008">

</figure>
:::

:::: {#fs-id2008343 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Rewrite the 13 x 2 −6 3 xy+7 y 2 =16 in the x ′ y ′ system without the x
′ y ′ term.

x ′ 2 4 + y ′ 2 1 =1
::::

::: {#Example_10_04_04 .example}
Graph the following equation relative to the x ′ y ′ system:

$$x^{2} + 12xy - 4y^{2} = 30$$

First, we find cot( 2θ ).

$$x^{2} + 12xy - 4y^{2} = 20\Rightarrow A = 1,\mspace{9mu} B = 12,\text{and~}C = -4$$

$$\begin{array}{l}
{\cot(2\theta) = \frac{A - C}{B}} \\
{\cot(2\theta) = \frac{1 - (-4)}{12}} \\
{\cot(2\theta) = \frac{5}{12}}
\end{array}$$

Because cot( 2θ )= 5 12 , we can draw a reference triangle as in
[\#](#).

<figure id="Figure_10_04_009">

</figure>

$$\cot\left( {2\theta} \right) = \frac{5}{12} = \frac{\text{adjacent}}{\text{opposite}}$$

Thus, the hypotenuse is

$$\begin{array}{r}
{5^{2} + 12^{2} = h^{2}} \\
{25 + 144 = h^{2}} \\
{169 = h^{2}} \\
{h = 13}
\end{array}$$

Next, we find sinθ and cosθ. We will use half-angle identities.

$$\begin{array}{l}
\begin{array}{l}
 \\
 \\
{\sin\mspace{9mu}\theta = \sqrt{\frac{1 - \cos(2\theta)}{2}} = \sqrt{\frac{1 - \frac{5}{13}}{2}} = \sqrt{\frac{\frac{13}{13} - \frac{5}{13}}{2}} = \sqrt{\frac{8}{13} \cdot \frac{1}{2}} = \frac{2}{\sqrt{13}}}
\end{array} \\
{\cos\mspace{9mu}\theta = \sqrt{\frac{1 + \cos(2\theta)}{2}} = \sqrt{\frac{1 + \frac{5}{13}}{2}} = \sqrt{\frac{\frac{13}{13} + \frac{5}{13}}{2}} = \sqrt{\frac{18}{13} \cdot \frac{1}{2}} = \frac{3}{\sqrt{13}}}
\end{array}$$

Now we find x and y. 

$$\begin{array}{l}
 \\
{x = x'\cos\mspace{9mu}\theta - y'\sin\mspace{9mu}\theta} \\
{x = x'\left( \frac{3}{\sqrt{13}} \right) - y'\left( \frac{2}{\sqrt{13}} \right)} \\
{x = \frac{3x' - 2y'}{\sqrt{13}}}
\end{array}$$

and

$$\begin{array}{l}
 \\
{y = x'\sin\mspace{9mu}\theta + y'\cos\mspace{9mu}\theta} \\
{y = x'\left( \frac{2}{\sqrt{13}} \right) + y'\left( \frac{3}{\sqrt{13}} \right)} \\
{y = \frac{2x' + 3y'}{\sqrt{13}}}
\end{array}$$

Now we substitute x= 3 x ′ −2 y ′ 13 and y= 2 x ′ +3 y ′ 13 into x 2
+12xy−4 y 2 =30.

$$\begin{array}{llll}
{\mspace{9mu}\text{~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~}\left( \frac{3x' - 2y'}{\sqrt{13}} \right)^{2} + 12\left( \frac{3x' - 2y'}{\sqrt{13}} \right)\left( \frac{2x' + 3y'}{\sqrt{13}} \right) - 4\left( \frac{2x' + 3y'}{\sqrt{13}} \right)^{2} = 30} & & & \\
{\mspace{9mu}\text{~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~}\mspace{9mu}\mspace{9mu}\left( \frac{1}{13} \right)\left\lbrack {{(3x' - 2y')}^{2} + 12(3x' - 2y')(2x' + 3y') - 4{(2x' + 3y')}^{2}} \right\rbrack = 30~} & & & {\text{Factor}.} \\
{\left( \frac{1}{13} \right)\left\lbrack {9x'{}^{2} - 12x'y' + 4y'{}^{2} + 12\left( {6x'{}^{2} + 5x'y' - 6y'{}^{2}} \right) - 4\left( {4x'{}^{2} + 12x'y' + 9y'{}^{2}} \right)} \right\rbrack = 30} & & & {\text{Multiply}.} \\
{\mspace{9mu}\ \left( \frac{1}{13} \right)\left\lbrack {9x'{}^{2} - 12x'y' + 4y'{}^{2} + 72x'{}^{2} + 60x'y' - 72y'{}^{2} - 16x'{}^{2} - 48x'y' - 36y'{}^{2}} \right\rbrack = 30} & & & {\text{Distribute}.} \\
{\mspace{9mu}\text{~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~}\mspace{9mu}\mspace{9mu}\left( \frac{1}{13} \right)\left\lbrack {65x'{}^{2} - 104y'{}^{2}} \right\rbrack = 30} & & & {\text{Combine~like~terms}.} \\
{\mspace{9mu}\text{~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~}65x'{}^{2} - 104y'{}^{2} = 390} & & & {\text{Multiply}.\mspace{9mu}\text{~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~}} \\
{\mspace{9mu}\text{~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~}\frac{x'{}^{2}}{6} - \frac{4y'{}^{2}}{15} = 1~} & & & {\text{Divide~by~390}.}
\end{array}$$

[\#](#) shows the graph of the hyperbola x ′ 2 6 − 4 y ′ 2 15 =1.     

<figure id="Figure_10_04_010">

</figure>
:::

# Identifying Conics without Rotating Axes {#fs-id2011771}

Now we have come full circle. How do we identify the type of conic
described by an equation? What happens when the axes are rotated?
Recall, the general form of a conic is

$$Ax^{2} + Bxy + Cy^{2} + Dx + Ey + F = 0$$

If we apply the rotation formulas to this equation we get the form

$$A'{x'}^{2} + B'x'y' + C'{y'}^{2} + D'x' + E'y' + F' = 0$$

It may be shown that B 2 −4AC= B ′ 2 −4 A ′ C ′ . The expression does
not vary after rotation, so we call the expression invariant*.* The
discriminant, B 2 −4AC, is invariant and remains unchanged after
rotation. Because the discriminant remains unchanged, observing the
discriminant enables us to identify the conic section.

:::: {#fs-id1971164 .note}
::: title
Using the Discriminant to Identify a Conic
:::

If the equation A x 2 +Bxy+C y 2 +Dx+Ey+F=0 is transformed by rotating
axes into the equation A ′ x ′ 2 + B ′ x ′ y ′ + C ′ y ′ 2 + D ′ x ′ + E
′ y ′ + F ′ =0, then B 2 −4AC= B ′ 2 −4 A ′ C ′ .

The equation A x 2 +Bxy+C y 2 +Dx+Ey+F=0 is an ellipse, a parabola, or a
hyperbola, or a degenerate case of one of these.

If the discriminant, B 2 −4AC, is

\<

0

,

the conic section is an ellipse

=

0

,

the conic section is a parabola

\>

0

,

the conic section is a hyperbola
::::

::: {#Example_10_04_05 .example}
Identify the conic for each of the following without rotating axes.

ⓐ

5

x

2

\+

2

3

x

y

\+

2

y

2

−

5

=

0

ⓑ

5

x

2

\+

2

3

x

y

\+

12

y

2

−

5

=

0

ⓐ

Let's begin by determining

A

,

B

,

and

C

.

$$\underset{A}{\underset{︸}{5}}x^{2} + \underset{B}{\underset{︸}{2\sqrt{3}}}xy + \underset{C}{\underset{︸}{2}}y^{2} - 5 = 0$$

Now, we find the discriminant.

$$\begin{array}{l}
{B^{2} - 4AC = \left( {2\sqrt{3}} \right)^{2} - 4(5)(2)} \\
{\mspace{9mu}\text{~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~} = 4(3) - 40} \\
{\mspace{9mu}\text{~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~} = 12 - 40} \\
{\mspace{9mu}\text{~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~} = - 28 < 0}
\end{array}$$

Therefore, 5 x 2 +2 3 xy+2 y 2 −5=0 represents an ellipse.

ⓑ

Again, let's begin by determining

A

,

B

,

and

C

.

$$\underset{A}{\underset{︸}{5}}x^{2} + \underset{B}{\underset{︸}{2\sqrt{3}}}xy + \underset{C}{\underset{︸}{12}}y^{2} - 5 = 0$$

Now, we find the discriminant.

$$\begin{array}{l}
{B^{2} - 4AC = \left( {2\sqrt{3}} \right)^{2} - 4(5)(12)} \\
{\mspace{9mu}\text{~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~} = 4(3) - 240} \\
{\mspace{9mu}\text{~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~} = 12 - 240} \\
{\mspace{9mu}\text{~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~} = - 228 < 0}
\end{array}$$

Therefore, 5 x 2 +2 3 xy+12 y 2 −5=0 represents an ellipse.
:::

:::: {#fs-id2436719 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Identify the conic for each of the following without rotating axes.

ⓐ

x

2

−

9

x

y

\+

3

y

2

−

12

=

0

ⓑ

10

x

2

−

9

x

y

\+

4

y

2

−

4

=

0

ⓐ

hyperbola

ⓑ

ellipse
::::

:::: {#fs-id1951748 .note}
::: title
:::

Media

Access this online resource for additional instruction and practice with
conic sections and rotation of axes.

Introduction to Conic Sections
::::

# Key Equations {#fs-id1951769}

  ------------------------------------------ ---------------------------------------------
  General Form equation of a conic section   A x 2 +Bxy+C y 2 +Dx+Ey+F=0
  Rotation of a conic section                x= x ′ cosθ− y ′ sinθ y= x ′ sinθ+ y ′ cosθ
  Angle of rotation                          θ,where cot( 2θ )= A−C B
  ------------------------------------------ ---------------------------------------------

# Key Concepts {#fs-id2430170}

Four basic shapes can result from the intersection of a plane with a
pair of right circular cones connected tail to tail. They include an
ellipse, a circle, a hyperbola, and a parabola.

A nondegenerate conic section has the general form

A

x

2

\+

B

x

y

\+

C

y

2

\+

D

x

\+

E

y

\+

F

=

0

where

A

,

B

and

C

are not all zero. The values of

A

,

B

,

and

C

determine the type of conic. See

.

Equations of conic sections with an

x

y

term have been rotated about the origin. See

.

The general form can be transformed into an equation in the

x

′

and

y

′

coordinate system without the

x

′

y

′

term. See

and

.

An expression is described as invariant if it remains unchanged after
rotating. Because the discriminant is invariant, observing it enables us
to identify the conic section. See

.

# Section Exercises {#fs-id2084607}

## Verbal {#fs-id2084610}

What effect does the xy term have on the graph of a conic section?

The xy term causes a rotation of the graph to occur.

If the equation of a conic section is written in the form A x 2 +B y 2
+Cx+Dy+E=0 and AB=0, what can we conclude?

If the equation of a conic section is written in the form A x 2 +Bxy+C y
2 +Dx+Ey+F=0, and B 2 −4AC\>0, what can we conclude?

The conic section is a hyperbola.

Given the equation a x 2 +4x+3 y 2 −12=0, what can we conclude if a\>0?

For the equation A x 2 +Bxy+C y 2 +Dx+Ey+F=0, the value of θ that
satisfies cot( 2θ )= A−C B gives us what information?

It gives the angle of rotation of the axes in order to eliminate the xy
term.

## Algebraic {#fs-id2100813}

For the following exercises, determine which conic section is
represented based on the given equation.

9 x 2 +4 y 2 +72x+36y−500=0

x 2 −10x+4y−10=0

AB=0, parabola

2 x 2 −2 y 2 +4x−6y−2=0

4 x 2 − y 2 +8x−1=0

AB=−4\<0, hyperbola

4 y 2 −5x+9y+1=0

2 x 2 +3 y 2 −8x−12y+2=0

AB=6\>0, ellipse

4 x 2 +9xy+4 y 2 −36y−125=0

3 x 2 +6xy+3 y 2 −36y−125=0

B 2 −4AC=0, parabola

−3 x 2 +3 3 xy−4 y 2 +9=0

2 x 2 +4 3 xy+6 y 2 −6x−3=0

B 2 −4AC=0, parabola

− x 2 +4 2 xy+2 y 2 −2y+1=0

8 x 2 +4 2 xy+4 y 2 −10x+1=0

B 2 −4AC=−96\<0, ellipse

For the following exercises, find a new representation of the given
equation after rotating through the given angle.

3 x 2 +xy+3 y 2 −5=0,θ=45°

4 x 2 −xy+4 y 2 −2=0,θ=45°

7 x ′ 2 +9 y ′ 2 −4=0

2 x 2 +8xy−1=0,θ=30°

−2 x 2 +8xy+1=0,θ=45°

3 x ′ 2 +2 x ′ y ′ −5 y ′ 2 +1=0

4 x 2 + 2 xy+4 y 2 +y+2=0,θ=45°

For the following exercises, determine the angle θ that will eliminate
the xy term and write the corresponding equation without the xy term.

x 2 +3 3 xy+4 y 2 +y−2=0

θ= 60 ∘ ,11 x ′ 2 − y ′ 2 + 3 x ′ + y ′ −4=0

4 x 2 +2 3 xy+6 y 2 +y−2=0

9 x 2 −3 3 xy+6 y 2 +4y−3=0

θ= - 30 ∘ ,21 x ′ 2 +9 y ′ 2 +4 x ′ −4 3 y ′ −6=0

−3 x 2 − 3 xy−2 y 2 −x=0

16 x 2 +24xy+9 y 2 +6x−6y+2=0

θ≈ 36.9 ∘ ,125 x ′ 2 +6 x ′ −42 y ′ +10=0

x 2 +4xy+4 y 2 +3x−2=0

x 2 +4xy+ y 2 −2x+1=0

θ= 45 ∘ ,3 x ′ 2 − y ′ 2 − 2 x ′ + 2 y ′ +1=0

4 x 2 −2 3 xy+6 y 2 −1=0

## Graphical {#fs-id2821469}

For the following exercises, rotate through the given angle based on the
given equation. Give the new equation and graph the original and rotated
equation.

y=− x 2 ,θ=− 45 ∘

2 2 ( x ′ + y ′ )= 1 2 ( x ′ − y ′ ) 2

x= y 2 ,θ= 45 ∘

x 2 4 + y 2 1 =1,θ= 45 ∘

( x ′ − y ′ ) 2 8 + ( x ′ + y ′ ) 2 2 =1

y 2 16 + x 2 9 =1,θ= 45 ∘

y 2 − x 2 =1,θ= 45 ∘

( x ′ + y ′ ) 2 2 − ( x ′ − y ′ ) 2 2 =1

y= x 2 2 ,θ= 30 ∘

x= ( y−1 ) 2 ,θ= 30 ∘

3 2 x ′ − 1 2 y ′ = ( 1 2 x ′ + 3 2 y ′ −1 ) 2

x 2 9 + y 2 4 =1,θ= 30 ∘

For the following exercises, graph the equation relative to the x ′ y ′
system in which the equation has no x ′ y ′ term.

xy=9

x 2 +10xy+ y 2 −6=0

x 2 −10xy+ y 2 −24=0

4 x 2 −3 3 xy+ y 2 −22=0

6 x 2 +2 3 xy+4 y 2 −21=0

11 x 2 +10 3 xy+ y 2 −64=0

21 x 2 +2 3 xy+19 y 2 −18=0

16 x 2 +24xy+9 y 2 −130x+90y=0

16 x 2 +24xy+9 y 2 −60x+80y=0

13 x 2 −6 3 xy+7 y 2 −16=0

4 x 2 −4xy+ y 2 −8 5 x−16 5 y=0

For the following exercises, determine the angle of rotation in order to
eliminate the xy term. Then graph the new set of axes.

6 x 2 −5 3 xy+ y 2 +10x−12y=0

6 x 2 −5xy+6 y 2 +20x−y=0

θ= 45 ∘

6 x 2 −8 3 xy+14 y 2 +10x−3y=0

4 x 2 +6 3 xy+10 y 2 +20x−40y=0

θ= 60 ∘

8 x 2 +3xy+4 y 2 +2x−4=0

16 x 2 +24xy+9 y 2 +20x−44y=0

θ≈ 36.9 ∘

For the following exercises, determine the value of k based on the given
equation.

Given 4 x 2 +kxy+16 y 2 +8x+24y−48=0, find k for the graph to be a
parabola.

Given 2 x 2 +kxy+12 y 2 +10x−16y+28=0, find k for the graph to be an
ellipse.

−4 6 \<k\<4 6

Given 3 x 2 +kxy+4 y 2 −6x+20y+128=0, find k for the graph to be a
hyperbola.

Given k x 2 +8xy+8 y 2 −12x+16y+18=0, find k for the graph to be a
parabola.

k=2

Given 6 x 2 +12xy+k y 2 +16x+10y+4=0, find k for the graph to be an
ellipse.

# 

angle of rotation

an acute angle formed by a set of axes rotated from the Cartesian plane
where, if

cot

(

2

θ

)

\>

0

,

then

θ

is between

(

0°

,

45°

)

;

if

cot

(

2

θ

)

\<

0

,

then

θ

is between

(

45°

,

90°

)

;

and if

cot

(

2

θ

)

=

0

,

then

θ

=

45°

degenerate conic sections

any of the possible shapes formed when a plane intersects a double cone
through the apex. Types of degenerate conic sections include a point, a
line, and intersecting lines.

nondegenerate conic section

a shape formed by the intersection of a plane with a double right cone
such that the plane does not pass through the apex; nondegenerate conics
include circles, ellipses, hyperbolas, and parabolas
