m49442

> In this section, you will:
>
> Identify a conic in polar form.
>
> Graph the polar equations of conics.
>
> Deﬁne conics in terms of a focus and a directrix.

17672e6c-13e2-4f93-82f9-ec2ce1759a57

<figure id="Figure_10_05_008">

</figure>

Most of us are familiar with orbital motion, such as the motion of a
planet around the sun or an electron around an atomic nucleus. Within
the planetary system, orbits of planets, asteroids, and comets around a
larger celestial body are often elliptical. Comets, however, may take on
a parabolic or hyperbolic orbit instead. And, in reality, the
characteristics of the planets' orbits may vary over time. Each orbit is
tied to the location of the celestial body being orbited and the
distance and direction of the planet or other object from that body. As
a result, we tend to use polar coordinates to represent these orbits.

In an elliptical orbit, the periapsis is the point at which the two
objects are closest, and the apoapsis is the point at which they are
farthest apart. Generally, the velocity of the orbiting body tends to
increase as it approaches the periapsis and decrease as it approaches
the apoapsis. Some objects reach an escape velocity, which results in an
infinite orbit. These bodies exhibit either a parabolic or a hyperbolic
orbit about a body; the orbiting body breaks free of the celestial
body's gravitational pull and fires off into space. Each of these orbits
can be modeled by a conic section in the polar coordinate system.

# Identifying a Conic in Polar Form {#fs-id1388752}

Any conic may be determined by three characteristics: a single focus, a
fixed line called the directrix, and the ratio of the distances of each
to a point on the graph. Consider the parabola x=2+ y 2 shown in
[\#](#).

<figure id="Figure_10_05_001">

</figure>

In [The Parabola](#), we learned how a parabola is defined by the focus
(a fixed point) and the directrix (a fixed line). In this section, we
will learn how to define any conic in the polar coordinate system in
terms of a fixed point, the focus P(r,θ) at the pole, and a line, the
directrix, which is perpendicular to the polar axis.

If F is a fixed point, the focus, and D is a fixed line, the directrix,
then we can let e be a fixed positive number, called the *eccentricity*,
which we can define as the ratio of the distances from a point on the
graph to the focus and the point on the graph to the directrix. Then the
set of all points P such that e= PF PD is a conic. In other words, we
can define a conic as the set of all points P with the property that the
ratio of the distance from P to F to the distance from P to D is equal
to the constant e.

For a conic with eccentricity e,

if

0

≤

e

\<

1

,

the conic is an ellipse

if

e

=

1

,

the conic is a parabola

if

e

\>

1

,

the conic is an hyperbola

With this definition, we may now define a conic in terms of the
directrix, x=±p, the eccentricity e, and the angle θ. Thus, each conic
may be written as a *polar equation*, an equation written in terms of r
and θ.

:::: {#fs-id1161380 .note}
::: title
The Polar Equation for a Conic
:::

For a conic with a focus at the origin, if the directrix is x=±p, where
p is a positive real number, and the eccentricity is a positive real
number e, the conic has a polar equation

$$r = \frac{ep}{1 \pm e\mspace{9mu}\cos\mspace{7mu}\theta}$$

For a conic with a focus at the origin, if the directrix is y=±p, where
p is a positive real number, and the eccentricity is a positive real
number e, the conic has a polar equation

$$r = \frac{ep}{1 \pm e\mspace{9mu}\sin\mspace{7mu}\theta}$$
::::

:::: {#fs-id1331670 .note}
::: title
:::

How To

*Given the polar equation for a conic, identify the type of conic, the
directrix, and the eccentricity.*

Multiply the numerator and denominator by the reciprocal of the constant
in the denominator to rewrite the equation in standard form.

Identify the eccentricity

e

as the coefficient of the trigonometric function in the denominator.

Compare

e

with 1 to determine the shape of the conic.

Determine the directrix as

x

=

p

if cosine is in the denominator and

y

=

p

if sine is in the denominator. Set

e

p

equal to the numerator in standard form to solve for

x

or

y

.
::::

::: {#Example_10_05_01 .example}
For each of the following equations, identify the conic with focus at
the origin, the directrix, and the eccentricity.

r

=

6

3

\+

2

sin

θ

r

=

12

4

\+

5

cos

θ

r

=

7

2

−

2

sin

θ

For each of the three conics, we will rewrite the equation in standard
form. Standard form has a 1 as the constant in the denominator.
Therefore, in all three parts, the first step will be to multiply the
numerator and denominator by the reciprocal of the constant of the
original equation, 1 c , where c is that constant.

Multiply the numerator and denominator by

1

3

.

$$r = \frac{6}{3 + 2\sin\mspace{7mu}\theta} \cdot \frac{\left( \frac{1}{3} \right)}{\left( \frac{1}{3} \right)} = \frac{6\left( \frac{1}{3} \right)}{3\left( \frac{1}{3} \right) + 2\left( \frac{1}{3} \right)\sin\mspace{7mu}\theta} = \frac{2}{1 + \frac{2}{3}\mspace{9mu}\sin\mspace{7mu}\theta}$$

Because sinθ is in the denominator, the directrix is y=p. Comparing to
standard form, note that e= 2 3 . Therefore, from the numerator,

$$\begin{array}{l}
{2 = ep} \\
{2 = \frac{2}{3}p} \\
{\left( \frac{3}{2} \right)2 = \left( \frac{3}{2} \right)\frac{2}{3}p} \\
{3 = p}
\end{array}$$

Since e\<1, the conic is an ellipse. The eccentricity is e= 2 3 and the
directrix is y=3.

Multiply the numerator and denominator by

1

4

.

$$\begin{array}{l}
\begin{array}{l}
 \\
 \\
{r = \frac{12}{4 + 5\mspace{9mu}\cos\mspace{7mu}\theta} \cdot \frac{\left( \frac{1}{4} \right)}{\left( \frac{1}{4} \right)}}
\end{array} \\
{r = \frac{12\left( \frac{1}{4} \right)}{4\left( \frac{1}{4} \right) + 5\left( \frac{1}{4} \right)\cos\mspace{7mu}\theta}} \\
{r = \frac{3}{1 + \frac{5}{4}\mspace{9mu}\cos\mspace{7mu}\theta}}
\end{array}$$

Because cosθ  is in the denominator, the directrix is x=p. Comparing to
standard form, e= 5 4 . Therefore, from the numerator,

$$\begin{array}{l}
{\mspace{9mu}\text{~~~~~}3 = ep} \\
{\mspace{9mu}\text{~~~~~}3 = \frac{5}{4}p} \\
{\mspace{9mu}\left( \frac{4}{5} \right)3 = \left( \frac{4}{5} \right)\frac{5}{4}p} \\
{\mspace{9mu}\text{~~}\mspace{9mu}\frac{12}{5} = p}
\end{array}$$

Since e\>1, the conic is a hyperbola. The eccentricity is e= 5 4 and the
directrix is x= 12 5 =2.4.

Multiply the numerator and denominator by

1

2

.

$$\begin{array}{l}
 \\
 \\
\begin{array}{l}
{r = \frac{7}{2 - 2\mspace{9mu}\sin\mspace{7mu}\theta} \cdot \frac{\left( \frac{1}{2} \right)}{\left( \frac{1}{2} \right)}} \\
{r = \frac{7\left( \frac{1}{2} \right)}{2\left( \frac{1}{2} \right) - 2\left( \frac{1}{2} \right)\mspace{9mu}\sin\mspace{7mu}\theta}} \\
{r = \frac{\frac{7}{2}}{1 - \sin\mspace{7mu}\theta}}
\end{array}
\end{array}$$

Because sine is in the denominator, the directrix is y=−p. Comparing to
standard form, e=1. Therefore, from the numerator,

$$\begin{array}{l}
{\frac{7}{2} = ep} \\
{\frac{7}{2} = (1)p} \\
{\frac{7}{2} = p}
\end{array}$$

Because e=1, the conic is a parabola. The eccentricity is e=1 and the
directrix is y=− 7 2 =−3.5.
:::

:::: {#fs-id2892298 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Identify the conic with focus at the origin, the directrix, and the
eccentricity for r= 2 3−cosθ .

ellipse; e= 1 3 ;x=−2
::::

# Graphing the Polar Equations of Conics {#fs-id1161787}

When graphing in Cartesian coordinates, each conic section has a unique
equation. This is not the case when graphing in polar coordinates. We
must use the eccentricity of a conic section to determine which type of
curve to graph, and then determine its specific characteristics. The
first step is to rewrite the conic in standard form as we have done in
the previous example. In other words, we need to rewrite the equation so
that the denominator begins with 1. This enables us to determine e and,
therefore, the shape of the curve. The next step is to substitute values
for θ and solve for r to plot a few key points. Setting θ equal to 0, π
2 ,π, and 3π 2 provides the vertices so we can create a rough sketch of
the graph.

::: {#Example_10_05_02 .example}
Graph r= 5 3+3cosθ .

First, we rewrite the conic in standard form by multiplying the
numerator and denominator by the reciprocal of 3, which is 1 3 .

$$\begin{array}{l}
\begin{array}{l}
 \\
 \\
{r = \frac{5}{3 + 3\mspace{9mu}\cos\mspace{7mu}\theta} = \frac{5\left( \frac{1}{3} \right)}{3\left( \frac{1}{3} \right) + 3\left( \frac{1}{3} \right)\cos\mspace{7mu}\theta}}
\end{array} \\
{r = \frac{\frac{5}{3}}{1 + \cos\mspace{7mu}\theta}}
\end{array}$$

Because e=1, we will graph a parabola with a focus at the origin. The
function has a  cosθ, and there is an addition sign in the denominator,
so the directrix is x=p.

$$\begin{array}{l}
{\frac{5}{3} = ep} \\
{\frac{5}{3} = (1)p} \\
{\frac{5}{3} = p}
\end{array}$$

The directrix is x= 5 3 .

Plotting a few key points as in [\#](#) will enable us to see the
vertices. See [\#](#).

                 A           B           C           D
  -------------- ----------- ----------- ----------- -----------
  θ              0           π 2         π           3π 2
  r= 5 3+3cosθ   5 6 ≈0.83   5 3 ≈1.67   undefined   5 3 ≈1.67

<figure id="Figure_10_05_002">

</figure>

We can check our result with a graphing utility. See [\#](#).

<figure id="Figure_10_05_003">

</figure>
:::

::: {#Example_10_05_03 .example}
Graph r= 8 2−3sinθ .

First, we rewrite the conic in standard form by multiplying the
numerator and denominator by the reciprocal of 2, which is 1 2 .

$$\begin{array}{l}
\begin{array}{l}
 \\
 \\
{r = \frac{8}{2 - 3\sin\mspace{7mu}\theta} = \frac{8\left( \frac{1}{2} \right)}{2\left( \frac{1}{2} \right) - 3\left( \frac{1}{2} \right)\sin\mspace{7mu}\theta}}
\end{array} \\
{r = \frac{4}{1 - \frac{3}{2}\mspace{9mu}\sin\mspace{7mu}\theta}}
\end{array}$$

Because e= 3 2 ,e\>1, so we will graph a hyperbola with a focus at the
origin. The function has a sinθ term and there is a subtraction sign in
the denominator, so the directrix is y=−p.

$$\begin{array}{l}
{4 = ep} \\
{4 = \left( \frac{3}{2} \right)p} \\
{4\left( \frac{2}{3} \right) = p} \\
{\frac{8}{3} = p}
\end{array}$$

The directrix is y=− 8 3 .

Plotting a few key points as in [\#](#) will enable us to see the
vertices. See [\#](#).

                 A   B     C   D
  -------------- --- ----- --- ----------
  θ              0   π 2   π   3π 2
  r= 8 2−3sinθ   4   −8    4   8 5 =1.6

<figure id="Figure_10_05_004">

</figure>
:::

::: {#Example_10_05_04 .example}
Graph r= 10 5−4cosθ .

First, we rewrite the conic in standard form by multiplying the
numerator and denominator by the reciprocal of 5, which is 1 5 .

$$\begin{array}{l}
 \\
\begin{array}{l}
{r = \frac{10}{5 - 4\cos\mspace{7mu}\theta} = \frac{10\left( \frac{1}{5} \right)}{5\left( \frac{1}{5} \right) - 4\left( \frac{1}{5} \right)\cos\mspace{7mu}\theta}} \\
{r = \frac{2}{1 - \frac{4}{5}\mspace{9mu}\cos\mspace{7mu}\theta}}
\end{array}
\end{array}$$

Because e= 4 5 ,e\<1, so we will graph an ellipse with a focus at the
origin. The function has a cosθ, and there is a subtraction sign in the
denominator, so the directrix is x=−p.

$$\begin{array}{l}
{2 = ep} \\
{2 = \left( \frac{4}{5} \right)p} \\
{2\left( \frac{5}{4} \right) = p} \\
{\frac{5}{2} = p}
\end{array}$$

The directrix is x=− 5 2 .

Plotting a few key points as in [\#](#) will enable us to see the
vertices. See [\#](#).

                  A    B     C           D
  --------------- ---- ----- ----------- ------
  θ               0    π 2   π           3π 2
  r= 10 5−4cosθ   10   2     10 9 ≈1.1   2

<figure id="Figure_10_05_006">

</figure>

We can check our result using a graphing utility. See [\#](#).

<figure id="Figure_10_05_007">

</figure>
:::

:::: {#fs-id2255486 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Graph r= 2 4−cosθ .
::::

# Deﬁning Conics in Terms of a Focus and a Directrix {#fs-id1916233}

So far we have been using polar equations of conics to describe and
graph the curve. Now we will work in reverse; we will use information
about the origin, eccentricity, and directrix to determine the polar
equation.

:::: {#fs-id3026921 .note}
::: title
:::

How To

*Given the focus, eccentricity, and directrix of a conic, determine the
polar equation.*

Determine whether the directrix is horizontal or vertical. If the
directrix is given in terms of

y

,

we use the general polar form in terms of sine. If the directrix is
given in terms of

x

,

we use the general polar form in terms of cosine.

Determine the sign in the denominator. If

p

\<

0

,

use subtraction. If

p

\>

0

,

use addition.

Write the coefficient of the trigonometric function as the given
eccentricity.

Write the absolute value of

p

in the numerator, and simplify the equation.
::::

::: {#Example_10_05_05 .example}
Find the polar form of the conic given a focus at the origin, e=3 and
directrix y=−2.

The directrix is y=−p, so we know the trigonometric function in the
denominator is sine.

Because y=−2,--2\<0, so we know there is a subtraction sign in the
denominator. We use the standard form of

$$r = \frac{ep}{1 - e\mspace{9mu}\sin\mspace{7mu}\theta}$$

and e=3 and \| −2 \|=2=p.

Therefore,

$$\begin{array}{l}
 \\
\begin{array}{l}
{r = \frac{(3)(2)}{1 - 3\mspace{9mu}\sin\mspace{7mu}\theta}} \\
{r = \frac{6}{1 - 3\mspace{9mu}\sin\mspace{7mu}\theta}}
\end{array}
\end{array}$$
:::

::: {#Example_10_05_06 .example}
Find the polar form of a conic given a focus at the origin, e= 3 5 , and
directrix x=4.

Because the directrix is x=p, we know the function in the denominator is
cosine. Because x=4,4\>0, so we know there is an addition sign in the
denominator. We use the standard form of

$$r = \frac{ep}{1 + e\mspace{9mu}\cos\mspace{7mu}\theta}$$

and e= 3 5 and \| 4 \|=4=p.

Therefore,

$$\begin{array}{l}
\begin{array}{l}
 \\
 \\
{r = \frac{\left( \frac{3}{5} \right)(4)}{1 + \frac{3}{5}\mspace{9mu}\cos\mspace{7mu}\theta}}
\end{array} \\
{r = \frac{\frac{12}{5}}{1 + \frac{3}{5}\mspace{9mu}\cos\mspace{7mu}\theta}} \\
{r = \frac{\frac{12}{5}}{1\left( \frac{5}{5} \right) + \frac{3}{5}\mspace{9mu}\cos\mspace{7mu}\theta}} \\
{r = \frac{\frac{12}{5}}{\frac{5}{5} + \frac{3}{5}\mspace{9mu}\cos\mspace{7mu}\theta}} \\
{r = \frac{12}{5} \cdot \frac{5}{5 + 3\mspace{9mu}\cos\mspace{7mu}\theta}} \\
{r = \frac{12}{5 + 3\mspace{9mu}\cos\mspace{7mu}\theta}}
\end{array}$$
:::

:::: {#fs-id2020858 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Find the polar form of the conic given a focus at the origin, e=1, and
directrix x=−1.

r= 1 1−cosθ
::::

::: {#Example_10_05_07 .example}
Convert the conic r= 1 5−5sinθ to rectangular form.

We will rearrange the formula to use the identities  r= x 2 + y 2
,x=rcosθ,and y=rsinθ.

$$\begin{array}{ll}
{\mspace{9mu}\text{~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~}r = \frac{1}{5 - 5\mspace{9mu}\sin\mspace{7mu}\theta}} & \\
{~r \cdot (5 - 5\mspace{9mu}\sin\mspace{7mu}\theta) = \frac{1}{5 - 5\mspace{9mu}\sin\mspace{7mu}\theta} \cdot (5 - 5\mspace{9mu}\sin\mspace{7mu}\theta)} & {\text{Eliminate~the~fraction}.} \\
{\mspace{9mu}\text{~~~~~~}\mspace{9mu} 5r - 5r\mspace{9mu}\sin\mspace{7mu}\theta = 1} & {\text{Distribute}.} \\
{\mspace{9mu}\text{~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~}5r = 1 + 5r\mspace{9mu}\sin\mspace{7mu}\theta} & {\text{Isolate~}5r.} \\
{\mspace{9mu}\text{~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~}25r^{2} = {(1 + 5r\mspace{9mu}\sin\mspace{7mu}\theta)}^{2}} & {\text{Square~both~sides}.} \\
{\mspace{9mu}\text{~~~~~~~~}25(x^{2} + y^{2}) = {(1 + 5y)}^{2}} & {\text{Substitute~}r = \sqrt{x^{2} + y^{2}}\mspace{9mu}\text{and~}y = r\mspace{9mu}\sin\mspace{7mu}\theta.} \\
{\mspace{9mu}\text{~~~~~~}\mspace{9mu} 25x^{2} + 25y^{2} = 1 + 10y + 25y^{2}} & {\text{Distribute~and~use~FOIL}.} \\
{\mspace{9mu}\text{~~~~~~~~}\mspace{9mu} 25x^{2} - 10y = 1} & {\text{Rearrange~terms~and~set~equal~to~1}.}
\end{array}$$
:::

:::: {#fs-id1587301 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Convert the conic r= 2 1+2cosθ to rectangular form.

4−8x+3 x 2 − y 2 =0
::::

:::: {#fs-id2773738 .note}
::: title
:::

Media

Access these online resources for additional instruction and practice
with conics in polar coordinates.

Polar Equations of Conic Sections

Graphing Polar Equations of Conics - 1

Graphing Polar Equations of Conics - 2
::::

# Key Concepts {#fs-id2773762}

Any conic may be determined by a single focus, the corresponding
eccentricity, and the directrix. We can also define a conic in terms of
a fixed point, the focus

P

(

r

,

θ

)

at the pole, and a line, the directrix, which is perpendicular to the
polar axis.

A conic is the set of all points

e

=

P

F

P

D

,

where eccentricity

e

is a positive real number. Each conic may be written in terms of its
polar equation. See

.

The polar equations of conics can be graphed. See

,

, and

.

Conics can be defined in terms of a focus, a directrix, and
eccentricity. See

and

.

We can use the identities

r

=

x

2

\+

y

2

,

x

=

r

cos

θ

,

and

y

=

r

sin

θ

to convert the equation for a conic from polar to rectangular form. See

.

# Section Exercises {#fs-id2879646}

## Verbal {#fs-id2879649}

Explain how eccentricity determines which conic section is given.

If eccentricity is less than 1, it is an ellipse. If eccentricity is
equal to 1, it is a parabola. If eccentricity is greater than 1, it is a
hyperbola.

If a conic section is written as a polar equation, what must be true of
the denominator?

If a conic section is written as a polar equation, and the denominator
involves sinθ, what conclusion can be drawn about the directrix?

The directrix will be parallel to the polar axis.

If the directrix of a conic section is perpendicular to the polar axis,
what do we know about the equation of the graph?

What do we know about the focus/foci of a conic section if it is written
as a polar equation?

One of the foci will be located at the origin.

## Algebraic {#fs-id1818232}

For the following exercises, identify the conic with a focus at the
origin, and then give the directrix and eccentricity.

r= 6 1−2cosθ

r= 3 4−4sinθ

Parabola with e=1 and directrix 3 4 units below the pole.

r= 8 4−3cosθ

r= 5 1+2sinθ

Hyperbola with e=2 and directrix 5 2 units above the pole.

r= 16 4+3cosθ

r= 3 10+10cosθ

Parabola with e=1 and directrix 3 10 units to the right of the pole.

r= 2 1−cosθ

r= 4 7+2cosθ

Ellipse with e= 2 7 and directrix 2 units to the right of the pole.

r(1−cosθ)=3

r(3+5sinθ)=11

Hyperbola with e= 5 3 and directrix 11 5 units above the pole.

r(4−5sinθ)=1

r(7+8cosθ)=7

Hyperbola with e= 8 7 and directrix 7 8 units to the right of the pole.

For the following exercises, convert the polar equation of a conic
section to a rectangular equation.

r= 4 1+3sinθ

r= 2 5−3sinθ

25 x 2 +16 y 2 −12y−4=0

r= 8 3−2cosθ

r= 3 2+5cosθ

21 x 2 −4 y 2 −30x+9=0

r= 4 2+2sinθ

r= 3 8−8cosθ

64 y 2 =48x+9

r= 2 6+7cosθ

r= 5 5−11sinθ

96 y 2 −25 x 2 +110y+25=0

r(5+2cosθ)=6

r(2−cosθ)=1

3 x 2 +4 y 2 −2x−1=0

r(2.5−2.5sinθ)=5

r= 6secθ −2+3secθ

5 x 2 +9 y 2 −24x−36=0

r= 6cscθ 3+2cscθ

For the following exercises, graph the given conic section. If it is a
parabola, label the vertex, focus, and directrix. If it is an ellipse,
label the vertices and foci. If it is a hyperbola, label the vertices
and foci.

r= 5 2+cosθ

r= 2 3+3sinθ

r= 10 5−4sinθ

r= 3 1+2cosθ

r= 8 4−5cosθ

r= 3 4−4cosθ

r= 2 1−sinθ

r= 6 3+2sinθ

r(1+cosθ)=5

r(3−4sinθ)=9

r(3−2sinθ)=6

r(6−4cosθ)=5

For the following exercises, find the polar equation of the conic with
focus at the origin and the given eccentricity and directrix.

Directrix: x=4;e= 1 5

r= 4 5+cosθ

Directrix: x=−4;e=5

Directrix: y=2;e=2

r= 4 1+2sinθ

Directrix: y=−2;e= 1 2

Directrix: x=1;e=1

r= 1 1+cosθ

Directrix: x=−1;e=1

Directrix: x=− 1 4 ;e= 7 2

r= 7 8−28cosθ

Directrix: y= 2 5 ;e= 7 2

Directrix: y=4;e= 3 2

r= 12 2+3sinθ

Directrix: x=−2;e= 8 3

Directrix: x=−5;e= 3 4

r= 15 4−3cosθ

Directrix: y=2;e=2.5

Directrix: x=−3;e= 1 3

r= 3 3−3cosθ

## Extensions {#fs-id2893505}

Recall from [Rotation of Axes](#) that equations of conics with an xy
term have rotated graphs. For the following exercises, express each
equation in polar form with r as a function of θ.

xy=2

x 2 +xy+ y 2 =4

r=± 2 1+sinθcosθ

2 x 2 +4xy+2 y 2 =9

16 x 2 +24xy+9 y 2 =4

r=± 2 4cosθ+3sinθ

2xy+y=1

# Chapter Review Exercises {#fs-id1237568}

## [The Ellipse](#) {#fs-id1237574}

For the following exercises, write the equation of the ellipse in
standard form. Then identify the center, vertices, and foci.

x 2 25 + y 2 64 =1

x 2 5 2 + y 2 8 2 =1; center: ( 0,0 ); vertices: ( 5,0 ),( −5,0 ),( 0,8
),( 0,−8 ); foci: ( 0, 39 ),( 0,− 39 )

(x−2) 2 100 + ( y+3 ) 2 36 =1

9 x 2 + y 2 +54x−4y+76=0

(x+3) 2 1 2 + (y−2) 2 3 2 =1(−3,2);(−2,2),(−4,2),(−3,5),(−3,−1);( −3,2+2
2 ),( −3,2−2 2 )

9 x 2 +36 y 2 −36x+72y+36=0

For the following exercises, graph the ellipse, noting center, vertices,
and foci.

x 2 36 + y 2 9 =1

center: ( 0,0 ); vertices: ( 6,0 ),( −6,0 ),( 0,3 ),( 0,−3 ); foci: ( 3
3 ,0 ),( −3 3 ,0 )

(x−4) 2 25 + ( y+3 ) 2 49 =1

4 x 2 + y 2 +16x+4y−44=0

center: ( −2,−2 ); vertices: ( 2,−2 ),( −6,−2 ),( −2,6 ),( −2,−10 );
foci: ( −2,−2+4 3 , ),( −2,−2−4 3 )

2 x 2 +3 y 2 −20x+12y+38=0

For the following exercises, use the given information to find the
equation for the ellipse.

Center at ( 0,0 ), focus at ( 3,0 ), vertex at ( −5,0 )

x 2 25 + y 2 16 =1

Center at ( 2,−2 ), vertex at ( 7,−2 ), focus at ( 4,−2 )

A whispering gallery is to be constructed such that the foci are located
35 feet from the center. If the length of the gallery is to be 100 feet,
what should the height of the ceiling be?

Approximately 35.71 feet

## [The Hyperbola](#) {#fs-id2329274}

For the following exercises, write the equation of the hyperbola in
standard form. Then give the center, vertices, and foci.

x 2 81 − y 2 9 =1

( y+1 ) 2 16 − ( x−4 ) 2 36 =1

( y+1 ) 2 4 2 − ( x−4 ) 2 6 2 =1; center: ( 4,−1 ); vertices: ( 4,3 ),(
4,−5 ); foci: ( 4,−1+2 13 ),( 4,−1−2 13 )

9 y 2 −4 x 2 +54y−16x+29=0

3 x 2 − y 2 −12x−6y−9=0

( x−2 ) 2 2 2 − ( y+3 ) 2 ( 2 3 ) 2 =1; center: ( 2,−3 ); vertices: (
4,−3 ),( 0,−3 ); foci: ( 6,−3 ),( −2,−3 )

For the following exercises, graph the hyperbola, labeling vertices and
foci.

x 2 9 − y 2 16 =1

( y−1 ) 2 49 − ( x+1 ) 2 4 =1

x 2 −4 y 2 +6x+32y−91=0

2 y 2 − x 2 −12y−6=0

For the following exercises, find the equation of the hyperbola.

Center at ( 0,0 ), vertex at ( 0,4 ), focus at ( 0,−6 )

Foci at ( 3,7 ) and ( 7,7 ), vertex at ( 6,7 )

( x−5 ) 2 1 − ( y−7 ) 2 3 =1

## [The Parabola](#) {#fs-id1931269}

For the following exercises, write the equation of the parabola in
standard form. Then give the vertex, focus, and directrix.

y 2 =12x

( x+2 ) 2 = 1 2 ( y−1 )

( x+2 ) 2 = 1 2 ( y−1 ); vertex: ( −2,1 ); focus: ( −2, 9 8 );
directrix: y= 7 8

y 2 −6y−6x−3=0

x 2 +10x−y+23=0

( x+5 ) 2 =( y+2 ); vertex: ( −5,−2 ); focus: ( −5,− 7 4 ); directrix:
y=− 9 4

For the following exercises, graph the parabola, labeling vertex, focus,
and directrix.

x 2 +4y=0

( y−1 ) 2 = 1 2 ( x+3 )

x 2 −8x−10y+46=0

2 y 2 +12y+6x+15=0

For the following exercises, write the equation of the parabola using
the given information.

Focus at ( −4,0 ); directrix is x=4

Focus at ( 2, 9 8 ); directrix is y= 7 8

( x−2 ) 2 =( 1 2 )( y−1 )

A cable TV receiving dish is the shape of a paraboloid of revolution.
Find the location of the receiver, which is placed at the focus, if the
dish is 5 feet across at its opening and 1.5 feet deep.

## [Rotation of Axes](#) {#fs-id1790052}

For the following exercises, determine which of the conic sections is
represented.

16 x 2 +24xy+9 y 2 +24x−60y−60=0

B 2 −4AC=0, parabola

4 x 2 +14xy+5 y 2 +18x−6y+30=0

4 x 2 +xy+2 y 2 +8x−26y+9=0

B 2 −4AC=−31\<0, ellipse

For the following exercises, determine the angle θ that will eliminate
the xy term, and write the corresponding equation without the xy term.

x 2 +4xy−2 y 2 −6=0

x 2 −xy+ y 2 −6=0

θ= 45 ∘ , x ′ 2 +3 y ′ 2 −12=0

For the following exercises, graph the equation relative to the x ′ y ′
system in which the equation has no x ′ y ′ term.

9 x 2 −24xy+16 y 2 −80x−60y+100=0

x 2 −xy+ y 2 −2=0

θ= 45 ∘

6 x 2 +24xy− y 2 −12x+26y+11=0

## [Conic Sections in Polar Coordinates](#) {#fs-id2886431}

For the following exercises, given the polar equation of the conic with
focus at the origin, identify the eccentricity and directrix.

r= 10 1−5cosθ

Hyperbola with e=5 and directrix 2 units to the left of the pole.

r= 6 3+2cosθ

r= 1 4+3sinθ

Ellipse with e= 3 4 and directrix 1 3 unit above the pole.

r= 3 5−5sinθ

For the following exercises, graph the conic given in polar form. If it
is a parabola, label the vertex, focus, and directrix. If it is an
ellipse or a hyperbola, label the vertices and foci.

r= 3 1−sinθ

r= 8 4+3sinθ

r= 10 4+5cosθ

r= 9 3−6cosθ

For the following exercises, given information about the graph of a
conic with focus at the origin, find the equation in polar form.

Directrix is x=3 and eccentricity e=1

r= 3 1+cos θ

Directrix is y=−2 and eccentricity e=4

# Practice Test {#fs-id3028922}

For the following exercises, write the equation in standard form and
state the center, vertices, and foci.

x 2 9 + y 2 4 =1

x 2 3 2 + y 2 2 2 =1; center: ( 0,0 ); vertices: ( 3,0 ),( --3,0 ),( 0,2
),( 0,−2 ); foci: ( 5 ,0 ),( − 5 ,0 )

9 y 2 +16 x 2 −36y+32x−92=0

For the following exercises, sketch the graph, identifying the center,
vertices, and foci.

( x−3 ) 2 64 + ( y−2 ) 2 36 =1

center: ( 3,2 ); vertices: ( 11,2 ),( −5,2 ),( 3,8 ),( 3,−4 ); foci: (
3+2 7 ,2 ),( 3−2 7 ,2 )

2 x 2 + y 2 +8x−6y−7=0

Write the standard form equation of an ellipse with a center at ( 1,2 ),
vertex at ( 7,2 ), and focus at ( 4,2 ).

( x−1 ) 2 36 + ( y−2 ) 2 27 =1

A whispering gallery is to be constructed with a length of 150 feet. If
the foci are to be located 20 feet away from the wall, how high should
the ceiling be?

For the following exercises, write the equation of the hyperbola in
standard form, and give the center, vertices, foci, and asymptotes.

x 2 49 − y 2 81 =1

x 2 7 2 − y 2 9 2 =1; center: ( 0,0 ); vertices ( 7,0 ),( −7,0 ); foci:
( 130 ,0 ),( − 130 ,0 ); asymptotes: y=± 9 7 x

16 y 2 −9 x 2 +128y+112=0

For the following exercises, graph the hyperbola, noting its center,
vertices, and foci. State the equations of the asymptotes.

( x−3 ) 2 25 − ( y+3 ) 2 1 =1

center: ( 3,−3 ); vertices: ( 8,−3 ),( −2,−3 ); foci: ( 3+ 26 ,−3 ),( 3−
26 ,−3 ); asymptotes: y=± 1 5 (x−3)−3

y 2 − x 2 +4y−4x−18=0

Write the standard form equation of a hyperbola with foci at ( 1,0 ) and
( 1,6 ), and a vertex at ( 1,2 ).

( y−3 ) 2 1 − ( x−1 ) 2 8 =1

For the following exercises, write the equation of the parabola in
standard form, and give the vertex, focus, and equation of the
directrix.

y 2 +10x=0

3 x 2 −12x−y+11=0

( x−2 ) 2 = 1 3 ( y+1 ); vertex: ( 2,−1 ); focus: ( 2,− 11 12 );
directrix: y=− 13 12

For the following exercises, graph the parabola, labeling the vertex,
focus, and directrix.

( x−1 ) 2 =−4( y+3 )

y 2 +8x−8y+40=0

Write the equation of a parabola with a focus at ( 2,3 ) and directrix
y=−1.

A searchlight is shaped like a paraboloid of revolution. If the light
source is located 1.5 feet from the base along the axis of symmetry, and
the depth of the searchlight is 3 feet, what should the width of the
opening be?

Approximately 8.49 feet

For the following exercises, determine which conic section is
represented by the given equation, and then determine the angle θ that
will eliminate the xy term.

3 x 2 −2xy+3 y 2 =4

x 2 +4xy+4 y 2 +6x−8y=0

parabola; θ≈ 63.4 ∘

For the following exercises, rewrite in the x ′ y ′ system without the x
′ y ′ term, and graph the rotated graph.

11 x 2 +10 3 xy+ y 2 =4

16 x 2 +24xy+9 y 2 −125x=0

x ′ 2 −4 x ′ +3 y ′ =0

For the following exercises, identify the conic with focus at the
origin, and then give the directrix and eccentricity.

r= 3 2−sinθ

r= 5 4+6cosθ

Hyperbola with e= 3 2 , and directrix 5 6 units to the right of the
pole.

For the following exercises, graph the given conic section. If it is a
parabola, label vertex, focus, and directrix. If it is an ellipse or a
hyperbola, label vertices and foci.

r= 12 4−8sinθ

r= 2 4+4sinθ

Find a polar equation of the conic with focus at the origin,
eccentricity of e=2, and directrix: x=3.

# 

eccentricity

the ratio of the distances from a point

P

on the graph to the focus

F

and to the directrix

D

represented by

e

=

P

F

P

D

,

where

e

is a positive real number

polar equation

an equation of a curve in polar coordinates

r

and

θ
