m51287

> 

57c2bde3-c791-4605-921a-80945e5d7db5

<figure id="Figure_07_00_001">

</figure>

When we think of tennis as a game of angles, we may imagine players
racing up to the net, creating options to deliver powerful cross shots
that will leave their opponent stumbling toward the line. This is an
exciting and effective method of play, though it brings greater risk.

But while the excitement of the game interplays with all types of
geometry, some of the newest innovations make even more use of
mathematics. With balls traveling well over 100 miles per hour judges
cannot always discern the centimeter or millimeters of difference
between a ball that is in or out of bounds. Professional tennis was
among the first sports to rely on an advanced tracking system called
Hawk-Eye to help make close calls. The system uses several
high-resolution cameras that are able to monitor and the ball\'s
movement and its position on the court. Using the images from several
cameras at once, the system\'s computers use trigonometric calculations
to triangulate the ball\'s exact position and, essentially, turn a
series of two-dimensional images into a three-dimensional one. Also,
since the ball travels faster than the cameras\' frame rate, the system
also must make predictions to show where a ball is at all times. These
technologies generally provide a more accurate game that builds more
confidence and fairness. Similar technologies are used for baseball, and
automated strike-calling is under discussion.
