m51288

> In this section, you will:
>
> Verify the fundamental trigonometric identities.
>
> Simplify trigonometric expressions using algebra and the identities.

ca2be86b-b94f-4af6-8ae3-73ba169cc8df

<figure id="Figure_07_01_006">

</figure>

In espionage movies, we see international spies with multiple passports,
each claiming a different identity. However, we know that each of those
passports represents the same person. The trigonometric identities act
in a similar manner to multiple passports---there are many ways to
represent the same trigonometric expression. Just as a spy will choose
an Italian passport when traveling to Italy, we choose the identity that
applies to the given scenario when solving a trigonometric equation.

In this section, we will begin an examination of the fundamental
trigonometric identities, including how we can verify them and how we
can use them to simplify trigonometric expressions.

# Verifying the Fundamental Trigonometric Identities {#fs-id2429534}

Identities enable us to simplify complicated expressions. They are the
basic tools of trigonometry used in solving trigonometric equations,
just as factoring, finding common denominators, and using special
formulas are the basic tools of solving algebraic equations. In fact, we
use algebraic techniques constantly to simplify trigonometric
expressions. Basic properties and formulas of algebra, such as the
difference of squares formula and the perfect squares formula, will
simplify the work involved with trigonometric expressions and equations.
We already know that all of the trigonometric functions are related
because they all are defined in terms of the unit circle. Consequently,
any trigonometric identity can be written in many ways.

To verify the trigonometric identities, we usually start with the more
complicated side of the equation and essentially rewrite the expression
until it has been transformed into the same expression as the other side
of the equation. Sometimes we have to factor expressions, expand
expressions, find common denominators, or use other algebraic strategies
to obtain the desired result. In this first section, we will work with
the fundamental identities: the Pythagorean identities, the even-odd
identities, the reciprocal identities, and the quotient identities.

We will begin with the *Pythagorean identities* (see [\#](#)), which are
equations involving trigonometric functions based on the properties of a
right triangle. We have already seen and used the first of these
identifies, but now we will also use additional identities.

+----------------------------------------------------------------+
| Pythagorean Identities                                         |
+:==================:+:===================:+:===================:+
| sin 2 θ+ cos 2 θ=1 | 1+ cot 2 θ= csc 2 θ | 1+ tan 2 θ= sec 2 θ |
+--------------------+---------------------+---------------------+

The second and third identities can be obtained by manipulating the
first. The identity 1+ cot 2 θ= csc 2 θ is found by rewriting the left
side of the equation in terms of sine and cosine.

Prove: 1+ cot 2 θ= csc 2 θ

$$\begin{array}{cclc}
{1 + \cot^{2}\theta} & = & \left( {1 + \frac{\cos^{2}\theta}{\sin^{2}\theta}} \right) & {\qquad\text{Rewrite~the~left~side}.} \\
 & = & {\left( \frac{\sin^{2}\theta}{\sin^{2}\theta} \right) + \left( \frac{\cos^{2}\theta}{\sin^{2}\theta} \right)} & {\qquad\text{Write~both~terms~with~the~common~denominator}.} \\
 & = & \frac{\sin^{2}\theta + \cos^{2}\theta}{\sin^{2}\theta} & \\
 & = & \frac{1}{\sin^{2}\theta} & \\
 & = & {\csc^{2}\theta} & 
\end{array}$$

Similarly, 1+ tan 2 θ= sec 2 θ can be obtained by rewriting the left
side of this identity in terms of sine and cosine. This gives

$$\begin{array}{cclc}
{1 + \tan^{2}\theta} & = & {1 + \left( \frac{\sin\;\theta}{\cos\;\theta} \right)^{2}} & {\quad\text{Rewrite~left~side}.} \\
 & = & {\left( \frac{\cos\;\theta}{\cos\;\theta} \right)^{2} + \left( \frac{\sin\;\theta}{\cos\;\theta} \right)^{2}} & {\quad\text{Write~both~terms~with~the~common~denominator}.} \\
 & = & \frac{\cos^{2}\;\theta + \sin^{2}\;\theta}{\cos^{2}\;\theta} & \\
 & = & \frac{1}{\cos^{2}\;\theta} & \\
 & = & {\sec^{2}\;\theta} & 
\end{array}$$

Recall that we determined which trigonometric functions are odd and
which are even. The next set of fundamental identities is the set of
*even-odd identities.* The even-odd identities relate the value of a
trigonometric function at a given angle to the value of the function at
the opposite angle. (See [\#](#)).

+--------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Even-Odd Identities                                                |
+======================+======================+======================+
| tan(−θ)=−tanθ        | sin(−θ)=−sinθ        | cos(−θ)=cosθ         |
| cot(−θ)=−cotθ        | csc(−θ)=−cscθ        | sec(−θ)=secθ         |
+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+

Recall that an odd function is one in which f(− x )= −f( x ) for all x
in the domain of f. The sine function is an odd function because sin( −θ
)=−sinθ. The graph of an odd function is symmetric about the origin. For
example, consider corresponding inputs of π 2 and − π 2 . The output of
sin( π 2 ) is opposite the output of sin( − π 2 ). Thus,

$$\begin{matrix}
{\sin\left( \frac{\pi}{2} \right)} & = & 1 \\
 & \text{and} & \\
{\sin\left( {- \frac{\pi}{2}} \right)} & = & {- \sin\left( \frac{\pi}{2} \right)} \\
 & = & -1
\end{matrix}$$

This is shown in [\#](#).

<figure id="Figure_07_01_002">

</figure>

Recall that an even function is one in which

$$f\left( {- x} \right) = f(x)\text{~for~all~}x\text{~in~the~domain~of~}f$$

The graph of an even function is symmetric about the *y-*axis. The
cosine function is an even function because cos(−θ)=cosθ. For example,
consider corresponding inputs π 4 and − π 4 . The output of cos( π 4 )
is the same as the output of cos( − π 4 ). Thus,

$$\begin{array}{ccl}
{\cos\left( {- \frac{\pi}{4}} \right)} & = & {\cos\left( \frac{\pi}{4} \right)} \\
 & \approx & 0.707
\end{array}$$

See [\#](#).

<figure id="Figure_07_01_003">

</figure>

For all θ in the domain of the sine and cosine functions, respectively,
we can state the following:

Since

sin

(−

θ

)

=

−

sin

θ

,

sine is an odd function.

Since,

cos

(−

θ

)

=

cos

θ

,

cosine is an even function.

The other even-odd identities follow from the even and odd nature of the
sine and cosine functions. For example, consider the tangent identity,
tan(− θ )=−tanθ. We can interpret the tangent of a negative angle as
tan(− θ )= sin( −θ ) cos(− θ ) = −sinθ cosθ =−tanθ. Tangent is therefore
an odd function, which means that tan( −θ )=−tan( θ ) for all θ in the
domain of the tangent function.

The cotangent identity, cot( −θ )=−cotθ, also follows from the sine and
cosine identities. We can interpret the cotangent of a negative angle as
cot( −θ )= cos( −θ ) sin( −θ ) = cosθ −sinθ =−cotθ. Cotangent is
therefore an odd function, which means that cot( −θ )=−cot( θ ) for all
θ in the domain of the cotangent function.

The cosecant function is the reciprocal of the sine function, which
means that the cosecant of a negative angle will be interpreted as csc(
−θ )= 1 sin( −θ ) = 1 −sinθ =−cscθ. The cosecant function is therefore
odd.

Finally, the secant function is the reciprocal of the cosine function,
and the secant of a negative angle is interpreted as sec( −θ )= 1 cos(
−θ ) = 1 cosθ =secθ. The secant function is therefore even.

To sum up, only two of the trigonometric functions, cosine and secant,
are even. The other four functions are odd, verifying the even-odd
identities.

The next set of fundamental identities is the set of reciprocal
identities, which, as their name implies, relate trigonometric functions
that are reciprocals of each other. See [\#](#). Recall that we first
encountered these identities when defining trigonometric functions from
right angles in [Right Angle Trigonometry](#).

+-----------------------------+
| Reciprocal Identities       |
+:============:+:============:+
| sinθ= 1 cscθ | cscθ= 1 sinθ |
+--------------+--------------+
| cosθ= 1 secθ | secθ= 1 cosθ |
+--------------+--------------+
| tanθ= 1 cotθ | cotθ= 1 tanθ |
+--------------+--------------+

The final set of identities is the set of quotient identities, which
define relationships among certain trigonometric functions and can be
very helpful in verifying other identities. See [\#](#).

+-----------------------------------+
| Quotient Identities               |
+:===============:+:===============:+
| tanθ= sinθ cosθ | cotθ= cosθ sinθ |
+-----------------+-----------------+

The reciprocal and quotient identities are derived from the definitions
of the basic trigonometric functions.

:::: {#fs-id1403866 .note}
::: title
Summarizing Trigonometric Identities
:::

The Pythagorean identities are based on the properties of a right
triangle.

$$\cos^{2}\theta + \sin^{2}\theta = 1$$

$$1 + \cot^{2}\theta = \csc^{2}\theta$$

$$1 + \tan^{2}\theta = \sec^{2}\theta$$

The even-odd identities relate the value of a trigonometric function at
a given angle to the value of the function at the opposite angle.

$$\tan\left( {- \theta} \right) = - \tan\;\theta$$

$$\cot\left( {- \theta} \right) = - \cot\;\theta$$

$$\sin\left( {- \theta} \right) = - \sin\;\theta$$

$$\csc\left( {- \theta} \right) = - \csc\;\theta$$

$$\cos\left( {- \theta} \right) = \cos\;\theta$$

$$\sec\left( {- \theta} \right) = \sec\;\theta$$

The reciprocal identities define reciprocals of the trigonometric
functions.

$$\sin\;\theta = \frac{1}{\csc\;\theta}$$

$$\cos\;\theta = \frac{1}{\sec\;\theta}$$

$$\tan\;\theta = \frac{1}{\cot\;\theta}$$

$$\csc\;\theta = \frac{1}{\sin\;\theta}$$

$$\sec\;\theta = \frac{1}{\cos\;\theta}$$

$$\cot\;\theta = \frac{1}{\tan\;\theta}$$

The quotient identities define the relationship among the trigonometric
functions.

$$\tan\;\theta = \frac{\sin\;\theta}{\cos\;\theta}$$

$$\cot\;\theta = \frac{\cos\;\theta}{\sin\;\theta}$$
::::

::: {#Example_07_01_01 .example}
Graph both sides of the identity cotθ= 1 tanθ . In other words, on the
graphing calculator, graph y=cotθ and y= 1 tanθ .

See [\#](#).

<figure id="Figure_07_01_007">

</figure>

We see only one graph because both expressions generate the same image.
One is on top of the other. This is a good way to confirm an identity
verified with analytical means. If both expressions give the same graph,
then they are most likely identities.
:::

:::: {#fs-id2467864 .note}
::: title
:::

How To

*Given a trigonometric identity, verify that it is true.*

Work on one side of the equation. It is usually better to start with the
more complex side, as it is easier to simplify than to build.

Look for opportunities to factor expressions, square a binomial, or add
fractions.

Noting which functions are in the final expression, look for
opportunities to use the identities and make the proper substitutions.

If these steps do not yield the desired result, try converting all terms
to sines and cosines.
::::

::: {#Example_07_01_02 .example}
Verify tanθcosθ=sinθ.

We will start on the left side, as it is the more complicated side:

$$\begin{array}{ccl}
{\tan\;\theta\;\cos\;\theta} & = & {\left( \frac{\sin\;\theta}{\cos\;\theta} \right)\cos\;\theta} \\
 & = & {\left( \frac{\sin\;\theta}{\cancel{\cos\;\theta}} \right)\cancel{\cos\;\theta}} \\
 & = & {\sin\;\theta}
\end{array}$$

This identity was fairly simple to verify, as it only required writing
tanθ in terms of sinθ and cosθ.
:::

:::: {#fs-id820368 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Verify the identity cscθcosθtanθ=1.

$$\begin{array}{ccl}
{\csc\;\theta\cos\;\theta\tan\;\theta} & = & {\left( \frac{1}{\sin\;\theta} \right)\cos\;\theta\left( \frac{\sin\;\theta}{\cos\;\theta} \right)} \\
 & = & {\frac{\cos\;\theta}{\sin\;\theta}\left( \frac{\sin\;\theta}{\cos\;\theta} \right)} \\
 & = & \frac{\sin\;\theta\cos\;\theta}{\sin\;\theta\cos\;\theta} \\
 & = & 1
\end{array}$$
::::

::: {#Example_07_01_03 .example}
Verify the following equivalency using the even-odd identities:

$$\left( {1 + \sin\; x} \right)\left\lbrack {1 + \sin\left( {- x} \right)} \right\rbrack = \cos^{2}x$$

Working on the left side of the equation, we have

$$\begin{array}{ccll}
{(1 + \sin\; x)\lbrack 1 + \sin(-x)\rbrack} & = & {(1 + \sin\; x)(1 - \sin\; x)} & {\quad\text{Since~sin(−}x\text{)=}-\sin\; x} \\
 & = & {1 - \sin^{2}x} & {\quad\text{Difference~of~squares}} \\
 & = & {\cos^{2}x} & {{\quad\text{cos}}^{2}x = 1 - \sin^{2}x}
\end{array}$$
:::

::: {#Example_07_01_04 .example}
Verify the identity sec 2 θ−1 sec 2 θ = sin 2 θ

As the left side is more complicated, let's begin there.

$$\begin{matrix}
\frac{\sec^{2}\theta - 1}{\sec^{2}\theta} & = & \frac{\left( {\tan^{2}\theta + 1} \right) - 1}{\sec^{2}\theta} & {{\qquad\text{sec}}^{2}\theta = \tan^{2}\theta + 1} \\
 & = & \frac{\tan^{2}\theta}{\sec^{2}\theta} & \\
 & = & {\tan^{2}\theta\left( \frac{1}{\sec^{2}\theta} \right)} & \\
 & = & {\tan^{2}\theta\left( {\cos^{2}\theta} \right)} & {\qquad\cos^{2}\theta = \frac{1}{\sec^{2}\theta}} \\
 & = & {\left( \frac{\sin^{2}\theta}{\cos^{2}\theta} \right)\left( {\cos^{2}\theta} \right)} & {{\qquad\text{tan}}^{2}\theta = \frac{\sin^{2}\theta}{\cos^{2}\theta}} \\
 & = & {\left( \frac{\sin^{2}\theta}{\cancel{\cos^{2}\theta}} \right)\left( \cancel{\cos^{2}\theta} \right)} & \\
 & = & {\sin^{2}\theta} & 
\end{matrix}$$

There is more than one way to verify an identity. Here is another
possibility. Again, we can start with the left side.

$$\begin{array}{ccl}
\frac{\sec^{2}\theta - 1}{\sec^{2}\theta} & = & {\frac{\sec^{2}\theta}{\sec^{2}\theta} - \frac{1}{\sec^{2}\theta}} \\
 & = & {1 - \cos^{2}\theta} \\
 & = & {\sin^{2}\theta}
\end{array}$$

In the first method, we used the identity sec 2 θ= tan 2 θ+1 and
continued to simplify. In the second method, we split the fraction,
putting both terms in the numerator over the common denominator. This
problem illustrates that there are multiple ways we can verify an
identity. Employing some creativity can sometimes simplify a procedure.
As long as the substitutions are correct, the answer will be the same.
:::

:::: {#fs-id2017058 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Show that cotθ cscθ =cosθ.

$$\begin{array}{ccl}
\frac{\cot\;\theta}{\csc\;\theta} & = & \frac{\frac{\cos\;\theta}{\sin\;\theta}}{\frac{1}{\sin\;\theta}} \\
 & = & {\frac{\cos\;\theta}{\sin\;\theta} \cdot \frac{\sin\;\theta}{1}} \\
 & = & {\cos\;\theta}
\end{array}$$
::::

::: {#Example_07_01_05 .example}
Create an identity for the expression 2tanθsecθ by rewriting strictly in
terms of sine.

There are a number of ways to begin, but here we will use the quotient
and reciprocal identities to rewrite the expression:

$$\begin{array}{cclc}
{2\;\tan\;\theta\;\sec\;\theta} & = & {2\left( \frac{\sin\;\theta}{\cos\;\theta} \right)\left( \frac{1}{\cos\;\theta} \right)} & \\
 & = & \frac{2\;\sin\;\theta}{\cos^{2}\theta} & \\
 & = & \frac{2\;\sin\;\theta}{1 - \sin^{2}\theta} & {\text{Substitute~}1 - \sin^{2}\;\theta\text{~for~}\cos^{2}\;\theta.}
\end{array}$$

Thus,

$$2\;\tan\;\theta\;\sec\;\theta = \frac{2\;\sin\;\theta}{1 - \sin^{2}\;\theta}$$
:::

::: {#Example_07_01_06 .example}
Verify the identity:

$$\frac{\sin^{2}\left( {- \theta} \right) - \cos^{2}\left( {- \theta} \right)}{\sin\left( {- \theta} \right) - \cos\left( {- \theta} \right)} = \cos\;\theta - \sin\;\theta$$

Let's start with the left side and simplify:

$$\begin{array}{cclc}
\frac{\sin^{2}(-\theta) - \cos^{2}(-\theta)}{\sin(-\theta) - \cos(-\theta)} & = & \frac{{\lbrack\sin(-\theta)\rbrack}^{2} - {\lbrack\cos(-\theta)\rbrack}^{2}}{\sin(-\theta) - \cos(-\theta)} & \\
 & = & \frac{{(-\sin\;\theta)}^{2} - {(\cos\;\theta)}^{2}}{-\sin\;\theta - \cos\;\theta} & {\quad\sin(-x) = -\sin\; x\;\text{and}\;\cos(-x) = \cos\; x} \\
 & = & \frac{{(\sin\;\theta)}^{2} - {(\cos\;\theta)}^{2}}{-\sin\;\theta - \cos\;\theta} & {\quad\text{Difference~of~squares}} \\
 & = & \frac{(\sin\;\theta - \cos\;\theta)(\sin\;\theta + \cos\;\theta)}{- (\sin\;\theta + \cos\;\theta)} & \\
 & = & \frac{(\sin\;\theta - \cos\;\theta)(\cancel{\sin\;\theta + \cos\;\theta})}{- (\cancel{\sin\;\theta + \cos\;\theta})} & \\
 & = & {\cos\;\theta - \sin\;\theta} & 
\end{array}$$
:::

:::: {#fs-id2137172 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Verify the identity sin 2 θ−1 tanθsinθ−tanθ = sinθ+1 tanθ .

sin 2 θ−1 tanθsinθ−tanθ = (sinθ+1)(sinθ−1) tanθ(sinθ−1) = sinθ+1 tanθ
::::

::: {#Example_07_01_07 .example}
Verify the identity: ( 1− cos 2 x )( 1+ cot 2 x )=1.

We will work on the left side of the equation.

$$\begin{array}{cclc}
{\left( {1 - \cos^{2}x} \right)\left( {1 + \cot^{2}x} \right)} & = & {\left( {1 - \cos^{2}x} \right)\left( {1 + \frac{\cos^{2}x}{\sin^{2}x}} \right)} & \\
 & = & {\left( {1 - \cos^{2}x} \right)\left( {\frac{\sin^{2}x}{\sin^{2}x} + \frac{\cos^{2}x}{\sin^{2}x}} \right)} & {\quad\quad\text{Find~the~common~denominator}.} \\
 & = & {\left( {1 - \cos^{2}x} \right)\left( \frac{\sin^{2}x + \cos^{2}x}{\sin^{2}x} \right)} & \\
 & = & {\left( {\sin^{2}x} \right)\left( \frac{1}{\sin^{2}x} \right)} & \\
 & = & 1 & 
\end{array}$$
:::

# Using Algebra to Simplify Trigonometric Expressions {#fs-id2485952}

We have seen that algebra is very important in verifying trigonometric
identities, but it is just as critical in simplifying trigonometric
expressions before solving. Being familiar with the basic properties and
formulas of algebra, such as the difference of squares formula, the
perfect square formula, or substitution, will simplify the work involved
with trigonometric expressions and equations.

For example, the equation ( sinx+1 )( sinx−1 )=0 resembles the equation
( x+1 )( x−1 )=0, which uses the factored form of the difference of
squares. Using algebra makes finding a solution straightforward and
familiar. We can set each factor equal to zero and solve. This is one
example of recognizing algebraic patterns in trigonometric expressions
or equations.

Another example is the difference of squares formula, a 2 − b 2 =( a−b
)( a+b ), which is widely used in many areas other than mathematics,
such as engineering, architecture, and physics. We can also create our
own identities by continually expanding an expression and making the
appropriate substitutions. Using algebraic properties and formulas makes
many trigonometric equations easier to understand and solve.

::: {#Example_07_01_08 .example}
Write the following trigonometric expression as an algebraic expression:
2 cos 2 θ+cosθ−1.

Notice that the pattern displayed has the same form as a standard
quadratic expression, a x 2 +bx+c. Letting cosθ=x, we can rewrite the
expression as follows:

$$2x^{2} + x - 1$$

This expression can be factored as ( 2x--1 )( x+1 ). If it were set
equal to zero and we wanted to solve the equation, we would use the zero
factor property and solve each factor for x. At this point, we would
replace x with cosθ and solve for θ.
:::

::: {#Example_07_05_09 .example}
Rewrite the trigonometric expression using the difference of squares: 4
cos 2 θ−1.

Notice that both the coefficient and the trigonometric expression in the
first term are squared, and the square of the number 1 is 1. This is the
difference of squares.

$$\begin{array}{ccl}
{4\;\cos^{2}\theta - 1} & = & {{(2\;\cos\;\theta)}^{2} - 1} \\
 & = & {(2\;\cos\;\theta - 1)(2\;\cos\;\theta + 1)}
\end{array}$$

If this expression were written in the form of an equation set equal to
zero, we could solve each factor using the zero factor property. We
could also use substitution like we did in the previous problem and let
cosθ=x, rewrite the expression as 4 x 2 −1, and factor ( 2x−1 )( 2x+1 ).
Then replace x with cosθ and solve for the angle.
:::

:::: {#fs-id2438482 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Rewrite the trigonometric expression using the difference of squares:
25−9 sin 2 θ.

This is a difference of squares formula: 25−9 sin 2
θ=(5−3sinθ)(5+3sinθ).
::::

::: {#Example_07_01_10 .example}
Simplify the expression by rewriting and using identities:

$$\csc^{2}\theta - \cot^{2}\theta$$

We can start with the Pythagorean identity.

$$1 + \cot^{2}\theta = \csc^{2}\theta$$

Now we can simplify by substituting 1+ cot 2 θ for csc 2 θ. We have

$$\begin{array}{ccl}
{\csc^{2}\theta - \cot^{2}\theta} & = & {1 + \cot^{2}\theta - \cot^{2}\theta} \\
 & = & 1
\end{array}$$
:::

:::: {#fs-id2607392 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Use algebraic techniques to verify the identity: cosθ 1+sinθ = 1−sinθ
cosθ .

(Hint: Multiply the numerator and denominator on the left side by
1−sinθ.)

$$\begin{array}{ccl}
{\frac{\cos\;\theta}{1 + \sin\;\theta}\left( \frac{1 - \sin\;\theta}{1 - \sin\;\theta} \right)} & = & \frac{\cos\;\theta(1 - \sin\;\theta)}{1 - \sin^{2}\theta} \\
 & = & \frac{\cos\;\theta(1 - \sin\;\theta)}{\cos^{2}\theta} \\
 & = & \frac{1 - \sin\;\theta}{\cos\;\theta}
\end{array}$$
::::

:::: {#fs-id1646590 .note}
::: title
:::

Media

Access these online resources for additional instruction and practice
with the fundamental trigonometric identities.

Fundamental Trigonometric Identities

Verifying Trigonometric Identities
::::

# Key Equations {#fs-id2056229}

  ------------------------ -----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Pythagorean identities   cos 2 θ+ sin 2 θ=1 1+ cot 2 θ= csc 2 θ 1+ tan 2 θ= sec 2 θ
  Even-odd identities      tan(−θ) = −tanθ cot(−θ) = −cotθ sin(−θ) = −sinθ csc(−θ) = −cscθ cos(−θ) = cosθ sec(−θ) = secθ
  Reciprocal identities    sinθ = 1 cscθ cosθ = 1 secθ tanθ = 1 cotθ cscθ = 1 sinθ secθ = 1 cosθ cotθ = 1 tanθ
  Quotient identities      tanθ = sinθ cosθ cotθ = cosθ sinθ
  ------------------------ -----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Key Concepts {#fs-id2081298}

There are multiple ways to represent a trigonometric expression.
Verifying the identities illustrates how expressions can be rewritten to
simplify a problem.

Graphing both sides of an identity will verify it. See

.

Simplifying one side of the equation to equal the other side is another
method for verifying an identity. See

and

.

The approach to verifying an identity depends on the nature of the
identity. It is often useful to begin on the more complex side of the
equation. See

.

We can create an identity and then verify it. See

.

Verifying an identity may involve algebra with the fundamental
identities. See

and

.

Algebraic techniques can be used to simplify trigonometric expressions.
We use algebraic techniques throughout this text, as they consist of the
fundamental rules of mathematics. See

,

, and

.

# Section Exercises {#fs-id2347805}

## Verbal {#fs-id2347808}

We know g(x)=cosx is an even function, and f(x)=sinx and h(x)=tanx are
odd functions. What about G(x)= cos 2 x,F(x)= sin 2 x, and H(x)= tan 2
x? Are they even, odd, or neither? Why?

All three functions, F,G, and H, are even.

This is because F( −x )=sin( −x )sin( −x )=( −sinx )( −sinx )= sin 2
x=F( x ),G( −x )=cos( −x )cos( −x )=cosxcosx= cos 2 x=G( x ) and H( −x
)=tan( −x )tan( −x )=( −tanx )( −tanx )= tan 2 x=H( x ).

Examine the graph of f(x)=secx on the interval \[−π,π\]. How can we tell
whether the function is even or odd by only observing the graph of
f(x)=secx?

After examining the reciprocal identity for sect, explain why the
function is undefined at certain points.

When cost=0, then sect= 1 0 , which is undefined.

All of the Pythagorean identities are related. Describe how to
manipulate the equations to get from sin 2 t+ cos 2 t=1 to the other
forms.

## Algebraic {#fs-id2796234}

For the following exercises, use the fundamental identities to fully
simplify the expression.

sinxcosxsecx

sinx

sin(−x)cos(−x)csc(−x)

tanxsinx+secx cos 2 x

secx

cscx+cosxcot(−x)

cott+tant sec(−t)

csct

3 sin 3 tcsct+ cos 2 t+2cos(−t)cost

−tan(−x)cot(−x)

−1

−sin(−x)cosxsecxcscxtanx cotx

1+ tan 2 θ csc 2 θ + sin 2 θ+ 1 sec 2 θ

sec 2 x

( tanx csc 2 x + tanx sec 2 x )( 1+tanx 1+cotx )− 1 cos 2 x

1− cos 2 x tan 2 x +2 sin 2 x

sin 2 x+1

For the following exercises, simplify the first trigonometric expression
by writing the simplified form in terms of the second expression.

tanx+cotx cscx ;cosx

secx+cscx 1+tanx ;sinx

1 sinx

cosx 1+sinx +tanx;cosx

1 sinxcosx −cotx;cotx

1 cotx

1 1−cosx − cosx 1+cosx ;cscx

( secx+cscx )( sinx+cosx )−2−cotx;tanx

tanx

1 cscx−sinx ;secx and tanx

1−sinx 1+sinx − 1+sinx 1−sinx ;secx and tanx

−4secxtanx

tanx;secx

secx;cotx

± 1 cot 2 x +1

secx;sinx

cotx;sinx

± 1− sin 2 x sinx

cotx;cscx

For the following exercises, verify the identity.

cosx− cos 3 x=cosx sin 2 x

Answers will vary. Sample proof:

cosx− cos 3 x = cosx(1− cos 2 x) = cosx sin 2 x

cosx( tanx−sec( −x ) )=sinx−1

1+ sin 2 x cos 2 x = 1 cos 2 x + sin 2 x cos 2 x =1+2 tan 2 x

Answers will vary. Sample proof: 1+ sin 2 x cos 2 x = 1 cos 2 x + sin 2
x cos 2 x = sec 2 x+ tan 2 x= tan 2 x+1+ tan 2 x=1+2 tan 2 x

( sinx+cosx ) 2 =1+2sinxcosx

cos 2 x− tan 2 x=2− sin 2 x− sec 2 x

Answers will vary. Sample proof: cos 2 x− tan 2 x=1− sin 2 x−( sec 2 x−1
)=1− sin 2 x− sec 2 x+1=2− sin 2 x− sec 2 x

## Extensions {#fs-id3240672}

For the following exercises, prove or disprove the identity.

1 1+cosx − 1 1−cos(−x) =−2cotxcscx

csc 2 x( 1+ sin 2 x )= cot 2 x

False

( sec 2 (−x)− tan 2 x tanx )( 2+2tanx 2+2cotx )−2 sin 2 x=cos2x

tanx secx sin( −x )= cos 2 x

False

sec( −x ) tanx+cotx =−sin( −x )

1+sinx cosx = cosx 1+sin( −x )

Proved with negative and Pythagorean identities

For the following exercises, determine whether the identity is true or
false. If false, find an appropriate equivalent expression.

cos 2 θ− sin 2 θ 1− tan 2 θ = sin 2 θ

3 sin 2 θ+4 cos 2 θ=3+ cos 2 θ

True 3 sin 2 θ+4 cos 2 θ=3 sin 2 θ+3 cos 2 θ+ cos 2 θ=3( sin 2 θ+ cos 2
θ )+ cos 2 θ=3+ cos 2 θ

secθ+tanθ cotθ+cosθ = sec 2 θ

# 

even-odd identities

set of equations involving trigonometric functions such that if

f

(

−

x

)

=

−

f

(

x

)

,

the identity is odd, and if

f

(

−

x

)

=

f

(

x

)

,

the identity is even

Pythagorean identities

set of equations involving trigonometric functions based on the right
triangle properties

quotient identities

pair of identities based on the fact that tangent is the ratio of sine
and cosine, and cotangent is the ratio of cosine and sine

reciprocal identities

set of equations involving the reciprocals of basic trigonometric
definitions
