m51289

> In this section, you will:
>
> Use sum and difference formulas for cosine.
>
> Use sum and difference formulas for sine.
>
> Use sum and difference formulas for tangent.
>
> Use sum and difference formulas for cofunctions.
>
> Use sum and difference formulas to verify identities.

2ca55029-6993-44ed-add7-62722e38f0cc

<figure id="Figure_07_02_001">

</figure>

How can the height of a mountain be measured? What about the distance
from Earth to the sun? Like many seemingly impossible problems, we rely
on mathematical formulas to find the answers. The trigonometric
identities, commonly used in mathematical proofs, have had real-world
applications for centuries, including their use in calculating long
distances.

The trigonometric identities we will examine in this section can be
traced to a Persian astronomer who lived around 950 AD, but the ancient
Greeks discovered these same formulas much earlier and stated them in
terms of chords. These are special equations or postulates, true for all
values input to the equations, and with innumerable applications.

In this section, we will learn techniques that will enable us to solve
problems such as the ones presented above. The formulas that follow will
simplify many trigonometric expressions and equations. Keep in mind
that, throughout this section, the term *formula* is used synonymously
with the word *identity*.

# Using the Sum and Difference Formulas for Cosine {#fs-id1902399}

Finding the exact value of the sine, cosine, or tangent of an angle is
often easier if we can rewrite the given angle in terms of two angles
that have known trigonometric values. We can use the special angles,
which we can review in the unit circle shown in [\#](#).

<figure id="Figure_07_02_008">

</figure>

We will begin with the sum and difference formulas for cosine, so that
we can find the cosine of a given angle if we can break it up into the
sum or difference of two of the special angles. See [\#](#).

  --------------------------------- ------------------------------
  *Sum formula for cosine*          cos( α+β )=cosαcosβ−sinαsinβ
  *Difference formula for cosine*   cos( α−β )=cosαcosβ+sinαsinβ
  --------------------------------- ------------------------------

First, we will prove the difference formula for cosines. Let's consider
two points on the unit circle. See [\#](#). Point P is at an angle α
from the positive *x-*axis with coordinates ( cosα,sinα ) and point Q is
at an angle of β from the positive *x-*axis with coordinates ( cosβ,sinβ
). Note the measure of angle POQ is α−β.

Label two more points: A at an angle of ( α−β ) from the positive
*x-*axis with coordinates ( cos( α−β ),sin( α−β ) ); and point B with
coordinates ( 1,0 ). Triangle POQ is a rotation of triangle AOB and thus
the distance from P to Q is the same as the distance from A to B.

<figure id="Figure_07_02_002">

</figure>

We can find the distance from P to Q using the distance formula.

$$\begin{array}{ccl}
d_{PQ} & = & \sqrt{{(\cos\;\alpha - \cos\;\beta)}^{2} + {(\sin\;\alpha - \sin\;\beta)}^{2}} \\
 & = & \sqrt{\cos^{2}\alpha - 2\;\cos\;\alpha\;\cos\;\beta + \cos^{2}\beta + \sin^{2}\alpha - 2\;\sin\;\alpha\;\sin\;\beta + \sin^{2}\beta}
\end{array}$$

Then we apply the Pythagorean identity and simplify.

$$\begin{array}{cl}
 = & \sqrt{\left( {\cos^{2}\alpha + \sin^{2}\alpha} \right) + \left( {\cos^{2}\beta + \sin^{2}\beta} \right) - 2\;\cos\;\alpha\;\cos\;\beta - 2\;\sin\;\alpha\;\sin\;\beta} \\
 = & \sqrt{1 + 1 - 2\;\cos\;\alpha\;\cos\;\beta - 2\;\sin\;\alpha\;\sin\;\beta} \\
 = & \sqrt{2 - 2\;\cos\;\alpha\;\cos\;\beta - 2\;\sin\;\alpha\;\sin\;\beta}
\end{array}$$

Similarly, using the distance formula we can find the distance from A to
B.

$$\begin{array}{ccl}
d_{AB} & = & \sqrt{{(\cos(\alpha - \beta) - 1)}^{2} + {(\sin(\alpha - \beta) - 0)}^{2}} \\
 & = & \sqrt{\cos^{2}(\alpha - \beta) - 2\;\cos(\alpha - \beta) + 1 + \sin^{2}(\alpha - \beta)}
\end{array}$$

Applying the Pythagorean identity and simplifying we get:

$$\begin{array}{cl}
 = & \sqrt{\left( {\cos^{2}(\alpha - \beta) + \sin^{2}(\alpha - \beta)} \right) - 2\;\cos(\alpha - \beta) + 1} \\
 = & \sqrt{1 - 2\;\cos(\alpha - \beta) + 1} \\
 = & \sqrt{2 - 2\;\cos(\alpha - \beta)}
\end{array}$$

Because the two distances are the same, we set them equal to each other
and simplify.

$$\begin{array}{rcl}
\sqrt{2 - 2\;\cos\;\alpha\;\cos\;\beta - 2\;\sin\;\alpha\;\sin\;\beta} & = & \sqrt{2 - 2\;\cos(\alpha - \beta)} \\
{2 - 2\;\cos\;\alpha\;\cos\;\beta - 2\;\sin\;\alpha\;\sin\;\beta} & = & {2 - 2\;\cos(\alpha - \beta)}
\end{array}$$

Finally we subtract 2 from both sides and divide both sides by −2.

$$\cos\;\alpha\;\cos\;\beta + \sin\;\alpha\;\sin\;\beta = \cos(\alpha - \beta)\text{~~}$$

Thus, we have the difference formula for cosine. We can use similar
methods to derive the cosine of the sum of two angles.

:::: {#fs-id1334205 .note}
::: title
Sum and Difference Formulas for Cosine
:::

These formulas can be used to calculate the cosine of sums and
differences of angles.

$$\cos(\alpha + \beta) = \cos\;\alpha\;\cos\;\beta - \sin\;\alpha\;\sin\;\beta$$

$$\cos(\alpha - \beta) = \cos\;\alpha\;\cos\;\beta + \sin\;\alpha\;\sin\;\beta$$
::::

:::: {#fs-id861912 .note}
::: title
:::

How To

*Given two angles, find the cosine of the difference between the
angles.*

Write the difference formula for cosine.

Substitute the values of the given angles into the formula.

Simplify.
::::

::: {#Example_07_02_01 .example}
Using the formula for the cosine of the difference of two angles, find
the exact value of cos( 5π 4 − π 6 ).

Begin by writing the formula for the cosine of the difference of two
angles. Then substitute the given values.

$$\begin{array}{ccl}
{\cos(\alpha - \beta)} & = & {\cos\;\alpha\;\cos\;\beta + \sin\;\alpha\;\sin\;\beta} \\
{\cos\left( {\frac{5\pi}{4} - \frac{\pi}{6}} \right)} & = & {\cos\left( \frac{5\pi}{4} \right)\cos\left( \frac{\pi}{6} \right) + \sin\left( \frac{5\pi}{4} \right)\sin\left( \frac{\pi}{6} \right)} \\
 & = & {\left( {- \frac{\sqrt{2}}{2}} \right)\left( \frac{\sqrt{3}}{2} \right) - \left( \frac{\sqrt{2}}{2} \right)\left( \frac{1}{2} \right)} \\
 & = & {- \frac{\sqrt{6}}{4} - \frac{\sqrt{2}}{4}} \\
 & = & \frac{- \sqrt{6} - \sqrt{2}}{4}
\end{array}$$

Keep in mind that we can always check the answer using a graphing
calculator in radian mode.
:::

:::: {#fs-id1369787 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Find the exact value of cos( π 3 − π 4 ).

2 + 6 4
::::

::: {#Example_07_02_02 .example}
Find the exact value of cos(75°).

As 75°=45°+30°, we can evaluate cos(75°) as cos(45°+30°).

$$\begin{array}{ccl}
{\cos(\alpha + \beta)} & = & {\cos\;\alpha\;\cos\;\beta - \sin\;\alpha\;\sin\;\beta} \\
{\cos(45{^\circ} + 30{^\circ})} & = & {\cos(45{^\circ})\cos(30{^\circ}) - \sin(45{^\circ})\sin(30{^\circ})} \\
 & = & {\frac{\sqrt{2}}{2}\left( \frac{\sqrt{3}}{2} \right) - \frac{\sqrt{2}}{2}\left( \frac{1}{2} \right)} \\
 & = & {\frac{\sqrt{6}}{4} - \frac{\sqrt{2}}{4}} \\
 & = & \frac{\sqrt{6} - \sqrt{2}}{4}
\end{array}$$

Keep in mind that we can always check the answer using a graphing
calculator in degree mode.

Note that we could have also solved this problem using the fact that
75°=135°−60°.

$$\begin{array}{ccl}
{\cos(\alpha - \beta)} & = & {\cos\;\alpha\;\cos\;\beta + \sin\;\alpha\;\sin\;\beta} \\
{\cos(135{^\circ} - 60{^\circ})} & = & {\cos(135{^\circ})\cos(60{^\circ}) + \sin(135{^\circ})\sin(60{^\circ})} \\
 & = & {\left( {- \frac{\sqrt{2}}{2}} \right)\left( \frac{1}{2} \right) + \left( \frac{\sqrt{2}}{2} \right)\left( \frac{\sqrt{3}}{2} \right)} \\
 & = & {\left( {- \frac{\sqrt{2}}{4}} \right) + \left( \frac{\sqrt{6}}{4} \right)} \\
 & = & \left( \frac{\sqrt{6} - \sqrt{2}}{4} \right)
\end{array}$$
:::

:::: {#fs-id1343512 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Find the exact value of cos(105°).

2 − 6 4
::::

# Using the Sum and Difference Formulas for Sine {#fs-id1388326}

The sum and difference formulas for sine can be derived in the same
manner as those for cosine, and they resemble the cosine formulas.

:::: {#fs-id1345043 .note}
::: title
Sum and Difference Formulas for Sine
:::

These formulas can be used to calculate the sines of sums and
differences of angles.

$$\sin\left( {\alpha + \beta} \right) = \sin\;\alpha\;\cos\;\beta + \cos\;\alpha\;\sin\;\beta$$

$$\sin\left( {\alpha - \beta} \right) = \sin\;\alpha\;\cos\;\beta - \cos\;\alpha\;\sin\;\beta$$
::::

:::: {#fs-id1274546 .note}
::: title
:::

How To

*Given two angles, find the sine of the difference between the angles.*

Write the difference formula for sine.

Substitute the given angles into the formula.

Simplify.
::::

::: {#Example_07_02_03 .example}
Use the sum and difference identities to evaluate the difference of the
angles and show that part *a* equals part *b.*

ⓐ

sin

(

45°

−

30°

)

ⓑ

sin

(

135°

−

120°

)

ⓐ

Let's begin by writing the formula and substitute the given angles.

$$\begin{array}{rcl}
{\sin(\alpha - \beta)} & = & {\sin\;\alpha\;\cos\;\beta - \cos\;\alpha\;\sin\;\beta} \\
{\sin(45{^\circ} - 30{^\circ})} & = & {\sin(45{^\circ})\cos(30{^\circ}) - \cos(45{^\circ})\sin(30{^\circ})}
\end{array}$$

Next, we need to find the values of the trigonometric expressions.

$$\sin(45{^\circ}) = \frac{\sqrt{2}}{2},\;\cos(30{^\circ}) = \frac{\sqrt{3}}{2},\;\cos(45{^\circ}) = \frac{\sqrt{2}}{2},\;\sin(30{^\circ}) = \frac{1}{2}$$

Now we can substitute these values into the equation and simplify.

$$\begin{array}{ccl}
{\sin(45{^\circ} - 30{^\circ})} & = & {\frac{\sqrt{2}}{2}\left( \frac{\sqrt{3}}{2} \right) - \frac{\sqrt{2}}{2}\left( \frac{1}{2} \right)} \\
 & = & \frac{\sqrt{6} - \sqrt{2}}{4}
\end{array}$$

ⓑ

Again, we write the formula and substitute the given angles.

$$\begin{array}{rcl}
{\sin(\alpha - \beta)} & = & {\sin\;\alpha\;\cos\;\beta - \cos\;\alpha\;\sin\;\beta} \\
{\sin(135{^\circ} - 120{^\circ})} & = & {\sin(135{^\circ})\cos(120{^\circ}) - \cos(135{^\circ})\sin(120{^\circ})}
\end{array}$$

Next, we find the values of the trigonometric expressions.

$$\sin(135{^\circ}) = \frac{\sqrt{2}}{2},\cos(120{^\circ}) = - \frac{1}{2},\cos(135{^\circ}) = \frac{\sqrt{2}}{2},\sin(120{^\circ}) = \frac{\sqrt{3}}{2}$$

Now we can substitute these values into the equation and simplify.

$$\begin{array}{ccl}
{\sin(135{^\circ} - 120{^\circ})} & = & {\frac{\sqrt{2}}{2}\left( {- \frac{1}{2}} \right) - \left( {- \frac{\sqrt{2}}{2}} \right)\left( \frac{\sqrt{3}}{2} \right)} \\
 & = & \frac{- \sqrt{2} + \sqrt{6}}{4} \\
 & = & \frac{\sqrt{6} - \sqrt{2}}{4}
\end{array}$$
:::

::: {#Example_07_02_04 .example}
Find the exact value of sin( cos −1 1 2 + sin −1 3 5 ). Then check the
answer with a graphing calculator.

The pattern displayed in this problem is sin( α+β ). Let α= cos −1 1 2
and β= sin −1 3 5 . Then we can write

$$\begin{array}{rcl}
{\cos\;\alpha} & = & {\frac{1}{2},0 \leq \alpha \leq \pi} \\
{\sin\;\beta} & = & {\frac{3}{5}, - \frac{\pi}{2} \leq \beta \leq \frac{\pi}{2}}
\end{array}$$

We will use the Pythagorean identities to find sinα and cosβ.

$$\begin{array}{ccl}
{\sin\;\alpha} & = & \sqrt{1 - \cos^{2}\alpha} \\
 & = & \sqrt{1 - \frac{1}{4}} \\
 & = & \sqrt{\frac{3}{4}} \\
 & = & \frac{\sqrt{3}}{2} \\
{\cos\;\beta} & = & \sqrt{1 - \sin^{2}\beta} \\
 & = & \sqrt{1 - \frac{9}{25}} \\
 & = & \sqrt{\frac{16}{25}} \\
 & = & \frac{4}{5}
\end{array}$$

Using the sum formula for sine,

$$\begin{array}{ccl}
{\sin\left( {\cos^{- 1}\frac{1}{2} + \sin^{- 1}\frac{3}{5}} \right)} & = & {\sin(\alpha + \beta)} \\
 & = & {\sin\;\alpha\;\cos\;\beta + \cos\;\alpha\;\sin\;\beta} \\
 & = & {\frac{\sqrt{3}}{2} \cdot \frac{4}{5} + \frac{1}{2} \cdot \frac{3}{5}} \\
 & = & \frac{4\sqrt{3} + 3}{10}
\end{array}$$
:::

# Using the Sum and Difference Formulas for Tangent {#fs-id2072911}

Finding exact values for the tangent of the sum or difference of two
angles is a little more complicated, but again, it is a matter of
recognizing the pattern.

Finding the sum of two angles formula for tangent involves taking
quotient of the sum formulas for sine and cosine and simplifying.
Recall, tanx= sinx cosx ,cosx≠0.

Let's derive the sum formula for tangent.

$$\begin{array}{cclc}
{\tan(\alpha + \beta)} & = & \frac{\sin(\alpha + \beta)}{\cos(\alpha + \beta)} & \\
 & = & \frac{\sin\;\alpha\;\cos\;\beta + \cos\;\alpha\;\sin\;\beta}{\cos\;\alpha\;\cos\;\beta - \sin\;\alpha\;\sin\;\beta} & \\
 & = & \frac{\frac{\sin\;\alpha\;\cos\;\beta + \cos\;\alpha\;\sin\;\beta}{\cos\;\alpha\;\cos\;\beta}}{\frac{\cos\;\alpha\;\cos\;\beta - \sin\;\alpha\;\sin\;\beta}{\cos\;\alpha\;\cos\;\beta}} & {\text{Divide~the~numerator~and~denominator~by~cos}\;\alpha\;\text{cos}\;\beta.} \\
 & = & \frac{\frac{\sin\;\alpha\cancel{\;\cos\;\beta}}{\cos\;\alpha\cancel{\;\cos\;\beta}} + \frac{\cancel{\cos\;\alpha}\;\sin\;\beta}{\cancel{\cos\;\alpha}\;\cos\;\beta}}{\frac{\cancel{\cos\;\alpha}\cancel{\;\cos\;\beta}}{\cancel{\cos\;\alpha}\;\cancel{\cos\;\beta}} - \frac{\sin\;\alpha\;\sin\;\beta}{\cos\;\alpha\;\cos\;\beta}} & \\
 & = & \frac{\frac{\sin\;\alpha}{\cos\;\alpha} + \frac{\sin\;\beta}{\cos\;\beta}}{1 - \frac{\sin\;\alpha\;\sin\;\beta}{\cos\;\alpha\;\cos\;\beta}} & \\
 & = & \frac{\tan\;\alpha + \tan\;\beta}{1 - \tan\;\alpha\;\tan\;\beta} & 
\end{array}$$

We can derive the difference formula for tangent in a similar way.

:::: {#fs-id2916561 .note}
::: title
Sum and Difference Formulas for Tangent
:::

The sum and difference formulas for tangent are:

$$\tan\left( {\alpha + \beta} \right) = \frac{\tan\;\alpha + \tan\;\beta}{1 - \tan\;\alpha\;\tan\;\beta}$$

$$\tan\left( {\alpha - \beta} \right) = \frac{\tan\;\alpha - \tan\;\beta}{1 + \tan\;\alpha\;\tan\;\beta}$$
::::

:::: {#fs-id1567999 .note}
::: title
:::

How To

*Given two angles, find the tangent of the sum of the angles.*

Write the sum formula for tangent.

Substitute the given angles into the formula.

Simplify.
::::

::: {#Example_07_02_05 .example}
Find the exact value of tan( π 6 + π 4 ).

Let's first write the sum formula for tangent and then substitute the
given angles into the formula.

$$\begin{array}{rcl}
{\tan(\alpha + \beta)} & = & \frac{\tan\;\alpha + \tan\;\beta}{1 - \tan\;\alpha\;\tan\;\beta} \\
{\tan\left( {\frac{\pi}{6} + \frac{\pi}{4}} \right)} & = & \frac{\tan\left( \frac{\pi}{6} \right) + \tan\left( \frac{\pi}{4} \right)}{1 - \left( {\tan\left( \frac{\pi}{6} \right)} \right)\left( {\tan\left( \frac{\pi}{4} \right)} \right)}
\end{array}$$

Next, we determine the individual function values within the formula:

$$\tan\left( \frac{\pi}{6} \right) = \frac{1}{\sqrt{3}},\tan\left( \frac{\pi}{4} \right) = 1$$

So we have

$$\begin{array}{ccl}
{\tan\left( {\frac{\pi}{6} + \frac{\pi}{4}} \right)} & = & \frac{\frac{1}{\sqrt{3}} + 1}{1 - \left( \frac{1}{\sqrt{3}} \right)(1)} \\
 & = & \frac{\frac{1 + \sqrt{3}}{\sqrt{3}}}{\frac{\sqrt{3} - 1}{\sqrt{3}}} \\
 & = & {\frac{1 + \sqrt{3}}{\sqrt{3}}\left( \frac{\sqrt{3}}{\sqrt{3} - 1} \right)} \\
 & = & \frac{\sqrt{3} + 1}{\sqrt{3} - 1}
\end{array}$$
:::

:::: {#fs-id1541743 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Find the exact value of tan( 2π 3 + π 4 ).

1− 3 1+ 3
::::

::: {#Example_07_02_06 .example}
Given sinα= 3 5 ,0\<α\< π 2 ,cosβ=− 5 13 ,π\<β\< 3π 2 , find

ⓐ

sin

(

α

\+

β

)

ⓑ

cos

(

α

\+

β

)

ⓒ

tan

(

α

\+

β

)

ⓓ

tan

(

α

−

β

)

We can use the sum and difference formulas to identify the sum or
difference of angles when the ratio of sine, cosine, or tangent is
provided for each of the individual angles. To do so, we construct what
is called a reference triangle to help find each component of the sum
and difference formulas.

ⓐ

To find

sin

(

α

\+

β

)

,

we begin with

sin

α

=

3

5

and

0

\<

α

\<

π

2

.

The side opposite

α

has length 3, the hypotenuse has length 5, and

α

is in the first quadrant. See

. Using the Pythagorean Theorem, we can find the length of side

a

:

$$\begin{array}{rcl}
{a^{2} + 3^{2}} & = & 5^{2} \\
a^{2} & = & 16 \\
a & = & 4
\end{array}$$

<figure id="Figure_07_02_003">

</figure>

Since cosβ=− 5 13 and π\<β\< 3π 2 , the side adjacent to β is −5, the
hypotenuse is 13, and β is in the third quadrant. See [\#](#). Again,
using the Pythagorean Theorem, we have

$$\begin{array}{rcl}
{{(-5)}^{2} + a^{2}} & = & 13^{2} \\
{25 + a^{2}} & = & 169 \\
a^{2} & = & 144 \\
a & = & {\pm 12}
\end{array}$$

Since β is in the third quadrant, a=--12.

<figure id="Figure_07_02_004">

</figure>

The next step is finding the cosine of α and the sine of β. The cosine
of α is the adjacent side over the hypotenuse. We can find it from the
triangle in [\#](#): cosα= 4 5 . We can also find the sine of β from the
triangle in [\#](#), as opposite side over the hypotenuse: sinβ=− 12 13
. Now we are ready to evaluate sin( α+β ).

$$\begin{array}{ccl}
{\sin(\alpha + \beta)} & = & {\sin\;\alpha\;\cos\;\beta + \cos\;\alpha\;\sin\;\beta} \\
 & = & {\left( \frac{3}{5} \right)\left( {- \frac{5}{13}} \right) + \left( \frac{4}{5} \right)\left( {- \frac{12}{13}} \right)} \\
 & = & {- \frac{15}{65} - \frac{48}{65}} \\
 & = & {- \frac{63}{65}}
\end{array}$$

ⓑ

We can find

cos

(

α

\+

β

)

in a similar manner. We substitute the values according to the formula.

$$\begin{array}{ccl}
{\cos(\alpha + \beta)} & = & {\cos\;\alpha\;\cos\;\beta - \sin\;\alpha\;\sin\;\beta} \\
 & = & {\left( \frac{4}{5} \right)\left( {- \frac{5}{13}} \right) - \left( \frac{3}{5} \right)\left( {- \frac{12}{13}} \right)} \\
 & = & {- \frac{20}{65} + \frac{36}{65}} \\
 & = & \frac{16}{65}
\end{array}$$

ⓒ

For

tan

(

α

\+

β

)

,

if

sin

α

=

3

5

and

cos

α

=

4

5

,

then

$$\tan\;\alpha = \frac{\frac{3}{5}}{\frac{4}{5}} = \frac{3}{4}$$

If sinβ=− 12 13 and cosβ=− 5 13 , then

$$\tan\;\beta = \frac{\frac{- 12}{13}}{\frac{- 5}{13}} = \frac{12}{5}$$

Then,

$$\begin{array}{ccl}
{\tan(\alpha + \beta)} & = & \frac{\tan\;\alpha + \tan\;\beta}{1 - \tan\;\alpha\;\tan\;\beta} \\
 & = & \frac{\frac{3}{4} + \frac{12}{5}}{1 - \frac{3}{4}\left( \frac{12}{5} \right)} \\
 & = & \frac{\text{~~}\frac{63}{20}}{- \frac{16}{20}} \\
 & = & {- \frac{63}{16}}
\end{array}$$

ⓓ

To find

tan

(

α

−

β

)

,

we have the values we need. We can substitute them in and evaluate.

$$\begin{array}{ccl}
{\tan(\alpha - \beta)} & = & \frac{\tan\;\alpha - \tan\;\beta}{1 + \tan\;\alpha\;\tan\;\beta} \\
 & = & \frac{\frac{3}{4} - \frac{12}{5}}{1 + \frac{3}{4}\left( \frac{12}{5} \right)} \\
 & = & \frac{- \frac{33}{20}}{\frac{56}{20}} \\
 & = & {- \frac{33}{56}}
\end{array}$$

A common mistake when addressing problems such as this one is that we
may be tempted to think that α and β are angles in the same triangle,
which of course, they are not. Also note that

$$\tan\left( {\alpha + \beta} \right) = \frac{\sin\left( {\alpha + \beta} \right)}{\cos\left( {\alpha + \beta} \right)}$$
:::

# Using Sum and Difference Formulas for Cofunctions {#fs-id2050772}

Now that we can find the sine, cosine, and tangent functions for the
sums and differences of angles, we can use them to do the same for their
cofunctions. You may recall from [Right Triangle Trigonometry](#) that,
if the sum of two positive angles is π 2 , those two angles are
complements, and the sum of the two acute angles in a right triangle is
π 2 , so they are also complements. In [\#](#), notice that if one of
the acute angles is labeled as θ, then the other acute angle must be
labeled ( π 2 −θ ).

Notice also that sinθ=cos( π 2 −θ ), which is opposite over hypotenuse.
Thus, when two angles are complementary, we can say that the sine of θ
equals the cofunction of the complement of θ. Similarly, tangent and
cotangent are cofunctions, and secant and cosecant are cofunctions.

<figure id="Figure_07_02_007">

</figure>

From these relationships, the cofunction identities are formed. Recall
that you first encountered these identities in [The Unit Circle: Sine
and Cosine Functions](#).

:::: {#fs-id2247036 .note}
::: title
Cofunction Identities
:::

The cofunction identities are summarized in [\#](#).

  -------------------- --------------------
   sinθ=cos( π 2 −θ )   cosθ=sin( π 2 −θ )
   tanθ=cot( π 2 −θ )   cotθ=tan( π 2 −θ )
   secθ=csc( π 2 −θ )   cscθ=sec( π 2 −θ )
  -------------------- --------------------
::::

Notice that the formulas in the table may also be justified
algebraically using the sum and difference formulas. For example, using

$$\cos\left( {\alpha - \beta} \right) = \cos\;\alpha\cos\;\beta + \sin\;\alpha\sin\;\beta,$$

we can write

$$\begin{array}{ccl}
{\cos\left( {\frac{\pi}{2} - \theta} \right)} & = & {\cos\;\frac{\pi}{2}\;\cos\;\theta + \sin\;\frac{\pi}{2}\;\sin\;\theta} \\
 & = & {(0)\cos\;\theta + (1)\sin\;\theta} \\
 & = & {\sin\;\theta}
\end{array}$$

::: {#Example_07_02_07 .example}
Write tan π 9 in terms of its cofunction.

The cofunction of tanθ=cot( π 2 −θ ). Thus,

$$\begin{array}{ccl}
{\tan\left( \frac{\pi}{9} \right)} & = & {\cot\left( {\frac{\pi}{2} - \frac{\pi}{9}} \right)} \\
 & = & {\cot\left( {\frac{9\pi}{18} - \frac{2\pi}{18}} \right)} \\
 & = & {\cot\left( \frac{7\pi}{18} \right)}
\end{array}$$
:::

:::: {#fs-id2109946 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Write sin π 7 in terms of its cofunction.

cos( 5π 14 )
::::

# Using the Sum and Difference Formulas to Verify Identities {#fs-id1926444}

Verifying an identity means demonstrating that the equation holds for
all values of the variable. It helps to be very familiar with the
identities or to have a list of them accessible while working the
problems. Reviewing the general rules presented earlier may help
simplify the process of verifying an identity.

:::: {#fs-id2637962 .note}
::: title
:::

How To

*Given an identity, verify using sum and difference formulas.*

Begin with the expression on the side of the equal sign that appears
most complex. Rewrite that expression until it matches the other side of
the equal sign. Occasionally, we might have to alter both sides, but
working on only one side is the most efficient.

Look for opportunities to use the sum and difference formulas.

Rewrite sums or differences of quotients as single quotients.

If the process becomes cumbersome, rewrite the expression in terms of
sines and cosines.
::::

::: {#Example_07_02_08 .example}
Verify the identity sin(α+β)+sin(α−β)=2sinαcosβ.

We see that the left side of the equation includes the sines of the sum
and the difference of angles.

$$\begin{array}{rcl}
{\sin(\alpha + \beta)} & = & {\sin\;\alpha\;\cos\;\beta + \cos\;\alpha\;\sin\;\beta} \\
{\sin(\alpha - \beta)} & = & {\sin\;\alpha\;\cos\;\beta - \cos\;\alpha\;\sin\;\beta}
\end{array}$$

We can rewrite each using the sum and difference formulas.

$$\begin{array}{ccl}
{\sin(\alpha + \beta) + \sin(\alpha - \beta)} & = & {\sin\;\alpha\;\cos\;\beta + \cos\;\alpha\;\sin\;\beta + \sin\;\alpha\;\cos\;\beta - \cos\;\alpha\;\sin\;\beta} \\
 & = & {2\;\sin\;\alpha\;\cos\;\beta}
\end{array}$$

We see that the identity is verified.
:::

::: {#Example_07_02_09 .example}
Verify the following identity.

$$\frac{\sin(\alpha - \beta)}{\cos\;\alpha\;\cos\;\beta} = \tan\;\alpha - \tan\;\beta$$

We can begin by rewriting the numerator on the left side of the
equation.

$$\begin{array}{cclc}
\frac{\sin(\alpha - \beta)}{\cos\;\alpha\;\cos\;\beta} & = & \frac{\sin\;\alpha\;\cos\;\beta - \cos\;\alpha\sin\;\beta}{\cos\;\alpha\cos\;\beta} & \\
 & = & {\frac{\sin\;\alpha\cancel{\;\cos\;\beta}}{\cos\;\alpha\cancel{\;\cos\;\beta}} - \frac{\cancel{\cos\;\alpha}\;\sin\;\beta}{\cancel{\cos\;\alpha}\;\cos\;\beta}} & {\qquad\text{Rewrite~using~a~common~denominator}.} \\
 & = & {\frac{\sin\;\alpha}{\cos\;\alpha} - \frac{\sin\;\beta}{\cos\;\beta}} & {\qquad\text{Cancel}.} \\
 & = & {\tan\;\alpha - \tan\;\beta} & {\qquad\text{Rewrite~in~terms~of~tangent}.}
\end{array}$$

We see that the identity is verified. In many cases, verifying tangent
identities can successfully be accomplished by writing the tangent in
terms of sine and cosine.
:::

:::: {#fs-id2822685 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Verify the identity: tan( π−θ )=−tanθ.

$$\begin{array}{ccl}
{\tan(\pi - \theta)} & = & \frac{\tan(\pi) - \tan\;\theta}{1 + \tan(\pi)\tan\theta} \\
 & = & \frac{0 - \tan\;\theta}{1 + 0 \cdot \tan\;\theta} \\
 & = & {- \tan\;\theta}
\end{array}$$
::::

::: {#Example_07_02_10 .example}
Let L 1 and L 2 denote two non-vertical intersecting lines, and let θ
denote the acute angle between L 1 and L 2 . See [\#](#). Show that

$$\tan\;\theta = \frac{m_{2} - m_{1}}{1 + m_{1}m_{2}}$$

where m 1 and m 2 are the slopes of L 1 and L 2 respectively. (*Hint:*
Use the fact that tan θ 1 = m 1 and tan θ 2 = m 2 . )

<figure id="Figure_07_02_005">

</figure>

Using the difference formula for tangent, this problem does not seem as
daunting as it might.

$$\begin{array}{ccl}
{\tan\;\theta} & = & {\tan\left( {\theta_{2} - \theta_{1}} \right)} \\
 & = & \frac{\tan\;\theta_{2} - \tan\;\theta_{1}}{1 + \tan\;\theta_{1}\tan\;\theta_{2}} \\
 & = & \frac{m_{2} - m_{1}}{1 + m_{1}m_{2}}
\end{array}$$
:::

::: {#Example_07_02_11 .example}
For a climbing wall, a guy-wire R is attached 47 feet high on a vertical
pole. Added support is provided by another guy-wire S attached 40 feet
above ground on the same pole. If the wires are attached to the ground
50 feet from the pole, find the angle α between the wires. See [\#](#).

<figure id="Figure_07_02_006">

</figure>

Let's first summarize the information we can gather from the diagram. As
only the sides adjacent to the right angle are known, we can use the
tangent function. Notice that tanβ= 47 50 , and tan( β−α )= 40 50 = 4 5
. We can then use difference formula for tangent.

$$\tan\left( {\beta - \alpha} \right) = \frac{\tan\;\beta - \tan\;\alpha}{1 + \tan\;\beta\tan\;\alpha}$$

Now, substituting the values we know into the formula, we have

$$\begin{array}{rcl}
\frac{4}{5} & = & \frac{\frac{47}{50} - \tan\;\alpha}{1 + \frac{47}{50}\tan\;\alpha} \\
{4\left( {1 + \frac{47}{50}\tan\;\alpha} \right)} & = & {5\left( {\frac{47}{50} - \tan\;\alpha} \right)}
\end{array}$$

Use the distributive property, and then simplify the functions.

$$\begin{array}{rcl}
{4(1) + 4\left( \frac{47}{50} \right)\tan\;\alpha} & = & {5\left( \frac{47}{50} \right) - 5\;\tan\;\alpha} \\
{4 + 3.76\;\tan\;\alpha} & = & {4.7 - 5\;\tan\;\alpha} \\
{5\;\tan\;\alpha + 3.76\;\tan\;\alpha} & = & 0.7 \\
{8.76\;\tan\;\alpha} & = & 0.7 \\
{\tan\;\alpha} & \approx & 0.07991 \\
{\tan^{- 1}(0.07991)} & \approx & .079741
\end{array}$$

Now we can calculate the angle in degrees.

$$\alpha \approx 0.079741\left( \frac{180}{\pi} \right) \approx 4.57{^\circ}$$

Occasionally, when an application appears that includes a right
triangle, we may think that solving is a matter of applying the
Pythagorean Theorem. That may be partially true, but it depends on what
the problem is asking and what information is given.
:::

:::: {#fs-id1243690 .note}
::: title
:::

Media

Access these online resources for additional instruction and practice
with sum and difference identities.

Sum and Difference Identities for Cosine

Sum and Difference Identities for Sine

Sum and Difference Identities for Tangent
::::

# Key Equations {#fs-id2332636}

  -------------------------------- -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Sum Formula for Cosine           cos( α+β )=cosαcosβ−sinαsinβ
  Difference Formula for Cosine    cos( α−β )=cosαcosβ+sinαsinβ
  Sum Formula for Sine             sin( α+β )=sinαcosβ+cosαsinβ
  Difference Formula for Sine      sin( α−β )=sinαcosβ−cosαsinβ
  Sum Formula for Tangent          tan( α+β )= tanα+tanβ 1−tanαtanβ
  Difference Formula for Tangent   tan( α−β )= tanα−tanβ 1+tanαtanβ
  Cofunction identities            sinθ = cos( π 2 −θ ) cosθ = sin( π 2 −θ ) tanθ = cot( π 2 −θ ) cotθ = tan( π 2 −θ ) secθ = csc( π 2 −θ ) cscθ = sec( π 2 −θ )
  -------------------------------- -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Key Concepts {#fs-id2224028}

The sum formula for cosines states that the cosine of the sum of two
angles equals the product of the cosines of the angles minus the product
of the sines of the angles. The difference formula for cosines states
that the cosine of the difference of two angles equals the product of
the cosines of the angles plus the product of the sines of the angles.

The sum and difference formulas can be used to find the exact values of
the sine, cosine, or tangent of an angle. See

and

.

The sum formula for sines states that the sine of the sum of two angles
equals the product of the sine of the first angle and cosine of the
second angle plus the product of the cosine of the first angle and the
sine of the second angle. The difference formula for sines states that
the sine of the difference of two angles equals the product of the sine
of the first angle and cosine of the second angle minus the product of
the cosine of the first angle and the sine of the second angle. See

.

The sum and difference formulas for sine and cosine can also be used for
inverse trigonometric functions. See

.

The sum formula for tangent states that the tangent of the sum of two
angles equals the sum of the tangents of the angles divided by 1 minus
the product of the tangents of the angles. The difference formula for
tangent states that the tangent of the difference of two angles equals
the difference of the tangents of the angles divided by 1 plus the
product of the tangents of the angles. See

.

The Pythagorean Theorem along with the sum and difference formulas can
be used to find multiple sums and differences of angles. See

.

The cofunction identities apply to complementary angles and pairs of
reciprocal functions. See

.

Sum and difference formulas are useful in verifying identities. See

and

.

Application problems are often easier to solve by using sum and
difference formulas. See

and

.

# Section Exercises {#fs-id2633717}

## Verbal {#fs-id2633720}

Explain the basis for the cofunction identities and when they apply.

The cofunction identities apply to complementary angles. Viewing the two
acute angles of a right triangle, if one of those angles measures x, the
second angle measures π 2 −x. Then sinx=cos( π 2 −x ). The same holds
for the other cofunction identities. The key is that the angles are
complementary.

Is there only one way to evaluate cos( 5π 4 )? Explain how to set up the
solution in two different ways, and then compute to make sure they give
the same answer.

Explain to someone who has forgotten the even-odd properties of
sinusoidal functions how the addition and subtraction formulas can
determine this characteristic for f(x)=sin(x) and g(x)=cos(x). (Hint:
0−x=−x )

sin( −x )=−sinx, so sinx is odd. cos( −x )=cos( 0−x )=cosx, so cosx is
even.

## Algebraic {#fs-id2030146}

For the following exercises, find the exact value.

cos( 7π 12 )

cos( π 12 )

2 + 6 4

sin( 5π 12 )

sin( 11π 12 )

6 − 2 4

tan( − π 12 )

tan( 19π 12 )

−2− 3

For the following exercises, rewrite in terms of sinx and cosx.

sin( x+ 11π 6 )

sin( x− 3π 4 )

− 2 2 sinx− 2 2 cosx

cos( x− 5π 6 )

cos( x+ 2π 3 )

− 1 2 cosx− 3 2 sinx

For the following exercises, simplify the given expression.

csc( π 2 −t )

sec( π 2 −θ )

cscθ

cot( π 2 −x )

tan( π 2 −x )

cotx

sin(2x)cos(5x)−sin(5x)cos(2x)

tan( 3 2 x )−tan( 7 5 x ) 1+tan( 3 2 x )tan( 7 5 x )

tan( x 10 )

For the following exercises, find the requested information.

Given that sina= 2 3 and cosb=− 1 4 , with a and b both in the interval
\[ π 2 ,π ), find sin(a+b) and cos(a−b).

Given that sina= 4 5 , and cosb= 1 3 , with a and b both in the interval
\[ 0, π 2 ), find sin(a−b) and cos(a+b).

sin(a−b) = ( 4 5 )( 1 3 )−( 3 5 )( 2 2 3 ) = 4−6 2 15 cos(a+b) = ( 3 5
)( 1 3 )−( 4 5 )( 2 2 3 ) = 3−8 2 15

For the following exercises, find the exact value of each expression.

sin( cos −1 (0)− cos −1 ( 1 2 ) )

cos( cos −1 ( 2 2 )+ sin −1 ( 3 2 ) )

2 − 6 4

tan( sin −1 ( 1 2 )− cos −1 ( 1 2 ) )

## Graphical {#fs-id1408229}

For the following exercises, simplify the expression, and then graph
both expressions as functions to verify the graphs are identical.
Confirm your answer using a graphing calculator.

cos( π 2 −x )

sinx

sin(π−x)

tan( π 3 +x )

cot( π 6 −x )

sin( π 3 +x )

tan( π 4 −x )

cot( π 4 +x )

cos( 7π 6 +x )

sin( π 4 +x )

sinx 2 + cosx 2

cos( 5π 4 +x )

For the following exercises, use a graph to determine whether the
functions are the same or different. If they are the same, show why. If
they are different, replace the second function with one that is
identical to the first. (Hint: think 2x=x+x. )

f( x )=sin( 4x )−sin( 3x )cosx,g( x )=sinxcos( 3x )

They are the same.

f( x )=cos( 4x )+sinxsin( 3x ),g( x )=−cosxcos( 3x )

f( x )=sin( 3x )cos( 6x ),g( x )=−sin( 3x )cos( 6x )

They are the different, try g( x )=sin( 9x )−cos( 3x )sin( 6x ).

f(x)=sin(4x),g(x)=sin(5x)cosx−cos(5x)sinx

f(x)=sin(2x),g(x)=2sinxcosx

They are the same.

f( θ )=cos( 2θ ),g( θ )= cos 2 θ− sin 2 θ

f(θ)=tan(2θ),g(θ)= tanθ 1+ tan 2 θ

They are the different, try g( θ )= 2tanθ 1− tan 2 θ .

f(x)=sin(3x)sinx,g(x)= sin 2 (2x) cos 2 x− cos 2 (2x) sin 2 x

f(x)=tan(−x),g(x)= tanx−tan(2x) 1−tanxtan(2x)

They are different, try g( x )= tanx−tan( 2x ) 1+tanxtan( 2x ) .

## Technology {#fs-id1429668}

For the following exercises, find the exact value algebraically, and
then confirm the answer with a calculator to the fourth decimal point.

sin(75°)

sin(195°)

− 3 −1 2 2 ,or −0.2588

cos(165°)

cos(345°)

1+ 3 2 2 , or 0.9659

tan(−15°)

## Extensions {#fs-id2244374}

For the following exercises, prove the identities provided.

tan(x+ π 4 )= tanx+1 1−tanx

tan( x+ π 4 ) = tanx+tan( π 4 ) 1−tanxtan( π 4 ) = tanx+1 1−tanx(1) =
tanx+1 1−tanx

tan(a+b) tan(a−b) = sinacosa+sinbcosb sinacosa−sinbcosb

cos(a+b) cosacosb =1−tanatanb

cos(a+b) cosacosb = cosacosb cosacosb − sinasinb cosacosb = 1−tanatanb

cos( x+y )cos( x−y )= cos 2 x− sin 2 y

cos(x+h)−cosx h =cosx cosh−1 h −sinx sinh h

cos(x+h)−cosx h = cosxcosh−sinxsinh−cosx h = cosx(cosh−1)−sinxsinh h =
cosx cosh−1 h −sinx sinh h

For the following exercises, prove or disprove the statements.

tan(u+v)= tanu+tanv 1−tanutanv

tan(u−v)= tanu−tanv 1+tanutanv

True

tan( x+y ) 1+tanxtanx = tanx+tany 1− tan 2 x tan 2 y

If α, β, and γ are angles in the same triangle, then prove or disprove
sin( α+β )=sinγ.

True. Note that  sin( α+β )=sin( π−γ )   and expand the right hand side.

If α,β, and y are angles in the same triangle, then prove or disprove
tanα+tanβ+tanγ=tanαtanβtanγ
