m51290

> In this section, you will:
>
> Use double-angle formulas to find exact values.
>
> Use double-angle formulas to verify identities.
>
> Use reduction formulas to simplify an expression.
>
> Use half-angle formulas to find exact values.

147570d3-ebb8-45fa-83a2-15666c91072b

<figure id="Figure_07_03_001">

</figure>

Bicycle and skateboard ramps made for competition (see [\#](#)) must
vary in height depending on the skill level of the competitors. For
advanced competitors, the angle formed by the ramp and the ground should
be θ such that tanθ= 5 3 . The angle is divided in half for novices.
What is the steepness of the ramp for novices? In this section, we will
investigate three additional categories of identities that we can use to
answer questions such as this one.

# Using Double-Angle Formulas to Find Exact Values {#fs-id1944514}

In the previous section, we used addition and subtraction formulas for
trigonometric functions. Now, we take another look at those same
formulas. The double-angle formulas are a special case of the sum
formulas, where α=β. Deriving the double-angle formula for sine begins
with the sum formula,

$$\sin\left( {\alpha + \beta} \right) = \sin\;\alpha\;\cos\;\beta + \cos\;\alpha\;\sin\;\beta$$

If we let α=β=θ, then we have

$$\begin{array}{rcl}
{\sin(\theta + \theta)} & = & {\sin\;\theta\;\cos\;\theta + \cos\;\theta\;\sin\;\theta} \\
{\sin(2\theta)} & = & {2\sin\;\theta\;\cos\;\theta}
\end{array}$$

Deriving the double-angle for cosine gives us three options. First,
starting from the sum formula, cos( α+β )=cosαcosβ−sinαsinβ, and letting
α=β=θ, we have

$$\begin{array}{rcl}
{\cos(\theta + \theta)} & = & {\cos\;\theta\;\cos\;\theta - \sin\;\theta\;\sin\;\theta} \\
{\cos(2\theta)} & = & {\cos^{2}\theta - \sin^{2}\theta}
\end{array}$$

Using the Pythagorean properties, we can expand this double-angle
formula for cosine and get two more variations. The first variation is:

$$\begin{array}{ccl}
{\cos(2\theta)} & = & {\cos^{2}\theta - \sin^{2}\theta} \\
 & = & {\left( {1 - \sin^{2}\theta} \right) - \sin^{2}\theta} \\
 & = & {1 - 2\sin^{2}\theta}
\end{array}$$

The second variation is:

$$\begin{array}{ccl}
{\cos(2\theta)} & = & {\cos^{2}\theta - \sin^{2}\theta} \\
 & = & {\cos^{2}\theta - \left( {1 - \cos^{2}\theta} \right)} \\
 & = & {2\;\cos^{2}\theta - 1}
\end{array}$$

Similarly, to derive the double-angle formula for tangent, replacing
α=β=θ in the sum formula gives

$$\begin{array}{rcl}
{\tan(\alpha + \beta)} & = & \frac{\tan\;\alpha + \tan\;\beta}{1 - \tan\;\alpha\;\tan\;\beta} \\
{\tan(\theta + \theta)} & = & \frac{\tan\;\theta + \tan\;\theta}{1 - \tan\;\theta\;\tan\;\theta} \\
{\tan(2\theta)} & = & \frac{2\tan\;\theta}{1 - \tan^{2}\theta}
\end{array}$$

:::: {#fs-id1992296 .note}
::: title
Double-Angle Formulas
:::

The double-angle formulas are summarized as follows:

$$\begin{array}{rcl}
{\sin(2\theta)} & = & {2\;\sin\;\theta\;\cos\;\theta}
\end{array}$$

$$\begin{array}{ccl}
{\mspace{27mu}\cos(2\theta)} & = & {\cos^{2}\theta - \sin^{2}\theta} \\
 & = & {1 - 2\;\sin^{2}\theta} \\
 & = & {2\;\cos^{2}\theta - 1}
\end{array}$$

$$\begin{array}{rcl}
{\tan(2\theta)} & = & \frac{2\;\tan\;\theta}{1 - \tan^{2}\theta}
\end{array}$$
::::

:::: {#fs-id1578259 .note}
::: title
:::

How To

*Given the tangent of an angle and the quadrant in which it is located,
use the double-angle formulas to find the exact value.*

Draw a triangle to reflect the given information.

Determine the correct double-angle formula.

Substitute values into the formula based on the triangle.

Simplify.
::::

::: {#Example_07_03_01 .example}
Given that tanθ=− 3 4 and θ is in quadrant II, find the following:

ⓐ

sin

(

2

θ

)

ⓑ

cos

(

2

θ

)

ⓒ

tan

(

2

θ

)

If we draw a triangle to reflect the information given, we can find the
values needed to solve the problems on the image. We are given tanθ=− 3
4 , such that θ is in quadrant II. The tangent of an angle is equal to
the opposite side over the adjacent side, and because θ is in the second
quadrant, the adjacent side is on the *x*-axis and is negative. Use the
Pythagorean Theorem to find the length of the hypotenuse:

$$\begin{array}{rcl}
{{(-4)}^{2} + {(3)}^{2}} & = & c^{2} \\
{16 + 9} & = & c^{2} \\
25 & = & c^{2} \\
c & = & 5
\end{array}$$

Now we can draw a triangle similar to the one shown in [\#](#).

<figure id="Figure_07_03_02">

</figure>

ⓐ

Let's begin by writing the double-angle formula for sine.

$$\sin(2\theta) = 2\;\sin\;\theta\;\cos\;\theta$$

We see that we to need to find sinθ and cosθ. Based on [\#](#), we see
that the hypotenuse equals 5, so sinθ= 3 5 , and cosθ=− 4 5 . Substitute
these values into the equation, and simplify.

Thus,

$$\begin{array}{ccl}
{\sin(2\theta)} & = & {2\left( \frac{3}{5} \right)\left( {- \frac{4}{5}} \right)} \\
 & = & {- \frac{24}{25}}
\end{array}$$

ⓑ

Write the double-angle formula for cosine.

$$\cos\left( {2\theta} \right) = \cos^{2}\theta - \sin^{2}\theta$$

Again, substitute the values of the sine and cosine into the equation,
and simplify.

$$\begin{array}{ccl}
{\cos(2\theta)} & = & {\left( {- \frac{4}{5}} \right)^{2} - \left( \frac{3}{5} \right)^{2}} \\
 & = & {\frac{16}{25} - \frac{9}{25}} \\
 & = & \frac{7}{25}
\end{array}$$

ⓒ

Write the double-angle formula for tangent.

$$\tan(2\theta) = \frac{2\;\tan\;\theta}{1 - \tan^{2}\theta}$$

In this formula, we need the tangent, which we were given as tanθ=− 3 4
. Substitute this value into the equation, and simplify.

$$\begin{array}{ccl}
{\tan(2\theta)} & = & \frac{2\left( {- \frac{3}{4}} \right)}{1 - \left( {- \frac{3}{4}} \right)^{2}} \\
 & = & \frac{- \frac{3}{2}}{1 - \frac{9}{16}} \\
 & = & {- \frac{3}{2}\left( \frac{16}{7} \right)} \\
 & = & {- \frac{24}{7}}
\end{array}$$
:::

:::: {#fs-id1864098 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Given sinα= 5 8 , with α in quadrant I, find cos( 2α ).

cos( 2α )= 7 32
::::

::: {#Example_07_03_02 .example}
Use the double-angle formula for cosine to write cos( 6x ) in terms of
cos( 3x ).

$$\begin{array}{ccl}
{\cos(6x)} & = & {\cos(2(3x))} \\
 & = & {{2\cos}^{2}(3x) - 1}
\end{array}$$

This example illustrates that we can use the double-angle formula
without having exact values. It emphasizes that the pattern is what we
need to remember and that identities are true for all values in the
domain of the trigonometric function.
:::

# Using Double-Angle Formulas to Verify Identities {#fs-id2249050}

Establishing identities using the double-angle formulas is performed
using the same steps we used to derive the sum and difference formulas.
Choose the more complicated side of the equation and rewrite it until it
matches the other side.

::: {#Example_07_03_03 .example}
Verify the following identity using double-angle formulas:

$$1 + \sin\left( {2\theta} \right) = \left( {\sin\;\theta + \cos\;\theta} \right)^{2}$$

We will work on the right side of the equal sign and rewrite the
expression until it matches the left side.

$$\begin{array}{ccl}
{(\sin\;\theta + \cos\;\theta)}^{2} & = & {\sin^{2}\theta + 2\;\sin\;\theta\;\cos\;\theta + \cos^{2}\theta} \\
 & = & {\left( {\sin^{2}\theta + \cos^{2}\theta} \right) + 2\;\sin\;\theta\;\cos\;\theta} \\
 & = & {1 + 2\;\sin\;\theta\;\cos\;\theta} \\
 & = & {1 + \sin(2\theta)}
\end{array}$$

This process is not complicated, as long as we recall the perfect square
formula from algebra:

$$\left( {a \pm b} \right)^{2} = a^{2} \pm 2ab + b^{2}$$

where a=sinθ and b=cosθ. Part of being successful in mathematics is the
ability to recognize patterns. While the terms or symbols may change,
the algebra remains consistent.
:::

:::: {#fs-id1897349 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Verify the identity: cos 4 θ− sin 4 θ=cos( 2θ ).

cos 4 θ− sin 4 θ=( cos 2 θ+ sin 2 θ )( cos 2 θ− sin 2 θ )=cos( 2θ )
::::

::: {#Example_07_03_04 .example}
Verify the identity:

$$\tan\left( {2\theta} \right) = \frac{2}{\cot\;\theta - \tan\;\theta}$$

In this case, we will work with the left side of the equation and
simplify or rewrite until it equals the right side of the equation.

$$\begin{array}{cclc}
{\tan(2\theta)} & = & \frac{2\;\tan\;\theta}{1 - \tan^{2}\theta} & {\qquad\text{Double-angle~formula}} \\
 & = & \frac{2\;\tan\;\theta\left( \frac{1}{\tan\;\theta} \right)}{(1 - \tan^{2}\theta)\left( \frac{1}{\tan\;\theta} \right)} & {\qquad\text{Multiply~by~a~term~that~results~in~desired~numerator}.} \\
 & = & \frac{2}{\frac{1}{\tan\;\theta} - \frac{\tan^{2}\theta}{\tan\;\theta}} & \\
 & = & \frac{2}{\cot\;\theta - \tan\;\theta} & {\qquad\text{Use~reciprocal~identity~for ~}\frac{1}{\tan\;\theta}.}
\end{array}$$

Here is a case where the more complicated side of the initial equation
appeared on the right, but we chose to work the left side. However, if
we had chosen the left side to rewrite, we would have been working
backwards to arrive at the equivalency. For example, suppose that we
wanted to show

$$\frac{2\tan\;\theta}{1 - \tan^{2}\theta} = \frac{2}{\cot\;\theta - \tan\;\theta}$$

Let's work on the right side.

$$\begin{array}{ccl}
\frac{2}{\cot\;\theta - \tan\;\theta} & = & {\frac{2}{\frac{1}{\tan\;\theta} - \tan\;\theta}\left( \frac{\tan\;\theta}{\tan\;\theta} \right)} \\
 & = & \frac{2\;\tan\;\theta}{\frac{1}{\cancel{\tan\;\theta}}(\cancel{\tan\;\theta}) - \tan\;\theta(\tan\;\theta)} \\
 & = & \frac{2\;\tan\;\theta}{1 - \tan^{2}\theta}
\end{array}$$

When using the identities to simplify a trigonometric expression or
solve a trigonometric equation, there are usually several paths to a
desired result. There is no set rule as to what side should be
manipulated. However, we should begin with the guidelines set forth
earlier.
:::

:::: {#fs-id1299752 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Verify the identity: cos(2θ)cosθ= cos 3 θ−cosθ sin 2 θ.

cos( 2θ )cosθ=( cos 2 θ− sin 2 θ )cosθ= cos 3 θ−cosθ sin 2 θ
::::

# Use Reduction Formulas to Simplify an Expression {#fs-id1355314}

The double-angle formulas can be used to derive the reduction formulas,
which are formulas we can use to reduce the power of a given expression
involving even powers of sine or cosine. They allow us to rewrite the
even powers of sine or cosine in terms of the first power of cosine.
These formulas are especially important in higher-level math courses,
calculus in particular. Also called the power-reducing formulas, three
identities are included and are easily derived from the double-angle
formulas.

We can use two of the three double-angle formulas for cosine to derive
the reduction formulas for sine and cosine. Let's begin with cos( 2θ
)=1−2 sin 2 θ. Solve for sin 2 θ:

$$\begin{array}{rcl}
{\cos(2\theta)} & = & {1 - 2\;\sin^{2}\theta} \\
{2\;\sin^{2}\theta} & = & {1 - \cos(2\theta)} \\
{\sin^{2}\theta} & = & \frac{1 - \cos(2\theta)}{2}
\end{array}$$

Next, we use the formula cos( 2θ )=2 cos 2 θ−1. Solve for cos 2 θ:

$$\begin{array}{rcl}
{\cos(2\theta)} & = & {\ 2\;\cos^{2}\theta - 1} \\
{1 + \cos(2\theta)} & = & {2\;\cos^{2}\theta} \\
\frac{1 + \cos(2\theta)}{2} & = & {\cos^{2}\theta}
\end{array}$$

The last reduction formula is derived by writing tangent in terms of
sine and cosine:

$$\begin{array}{cclc}
{\tan^{2}\theta} & = & \frac{\sin^{2}\theta}{\cos^{2}\theta} & \\
 & = & \frac{\frac{1 - \cos(2\theta)}{2}}{\frac{1 + \cos(2\theta)}{2}} & {\qquad\text{Substitute~the~reduction~formulas}\text{.}} \\
 & = & {\left( \frac{1 - \cos(2\theta)}{2} \right)\left( \frac{2}{1 + \cos(2\theta)} \right)} & \\
 & = & \frac{1 - \cos(2\theta)}{1 + \cos(2\theta)} & 
\end{array}$$

:::: {#fs-id2900248 .note}
::: title
Reduction Formulas
:::

The reduction formulas are summarized as follows:

$$\sin^{2}\theta = \frac{1 - \cos\left( {2\theta} \right)}{2}$$

$$\cos^{2}\theta = \frac{1 + \cos\left( {2\theta} \right)}{2}$$

$$\tan^{2}\theta = \frac{1 - \cos\left( {2\theta} \right)}{1 + \cos\left( {2\theta} \right)}$$
::::

::: {#Example_07_03_05 .example}
Write an equivalent expression for cos 4 x that does not involve any
powers of sine or cosine greater than 1.

We will apply the reduction formula for cosine twice.

$$\begin{array}{cclc}
{\cos^{4}x} & = & \left( {\cos^{2}x} \right)^{2} & \\
 & = & \left( \frac{1 + \cos(2x)}{2} \right)^{2} & {{\qquad\text{Substitute~reduction~formula~for~cos}}^{2}x.} \\
 & = & {\frac{1}{4}\left( {1 + 2\cos(2x) + \cos^{2}(2x)} \right)} & \\
 & = & {\frac{1}{4} + \frac{1}{2}\;\cos(2x) + \frac{1}{4}\left( \frac{1 + \cos 2(2x)}{2} \right)} & {{\qquad\text{Substitute~reduction~formula~for~cos}}^{2}x.} \\
 & = & {\frac{1}{4} + \frac{1}{2}\;\cos(2x) + \frac{1}{8} + \frac{1}{8}\;\cos(4x)} & \\
 & = & {\frac{3}{8} + \frac{1}{2}\;\cos(2x) + \frac{1}{8}\;\cos(4x)} & 
\end{array}$$

The solution is found by using the reduction formula twice, as noted,
and the perfect square formula from algebra.
:::

::: {#Example_07_03_06 .example}
Use the power-reducing formulas to prove

$$\sin^{3}\left( {2x} \right) = \left\lbrack {\frac{1}{2}\;\sin\left( {2x} \right)} \right\rbrack\;\left\lbrack {1 - \cos\left( {4x} \right)} \right\rbrack$$

We will work on simplifying the left side of the equation:

$$\begin{array}{cclc}
{\sin^{3}(2x)} & = & {\lbrack\sin(2x)\rbrack\left\lbrack \sin^{2}(2x) \right\rbrack} & \\
 & = & {\sin(2x)\left\lbrack \frac{1 - \cos(4x)}{2} \right\rbrack} & {\text{Substitute~the~power-reduction~formula}.} \\
 & = & {\sin(2x)\left( \frac{1}{2} \right)\lbrack 1 - \cos(4x)\rbrack} & \\
 & = & {\frac{1}{2}\lbrack\sin(2x)\rbrack\lbrack 1 - \cos(4x)\rbrack} & 
\end{array}$$

Note that in this example, we substituted

$$\frac{1 - \cos\left( {4x} \right)}{2}$$

for sin 2 ( 2x ). The formula states

$$\sin^{2}\theta = \frac{1 - \cos\left( {2\theta} \right)}{2}$$

We let θ=2x, so 2θ=4x.
:::

:::: {#fs-id1753781 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Use the power-reducing formulas to prove that 10 cos 4 x= 15 4 +5cos( 2x
)+ 5 4 cos( 4x ).

10 cos 4 x = 10 ( cos 2 x ) 2 = 10 \[ 1+cos(2x) 2 \] 2
Substitute reduction formula for cos 2 x. = 10 4 \[1+2cos(2x)+ cos 2
(2x)\] = 10 4 + 10 2 cos(2x)+ 10 4 ( 1+cos2(2x) 2 )
Substitute reduction formula for cos 2 x. = 10 4 + 10 2 cos(2x)+ 10 8 +
10 8 cos(4x) = 30 8 +5cos(2x)+ 10 8 cos(4x) = 15 4 +5cos(2x)+ 5 4
cos(4x)
::::

# Using Half-Angle Formulas to Find Exact Values {#fs-id2177692}

The next set of identities is the set of half-angle formulas, which can
be derived from the reduction formulas and we can use when we have an
angle that is half the size of a special angle. If we replace θ with α 2
, the half-angle formula for sine is found by simplifying the equation
and solving for sin( α 2 ). Note that the half-angle formulas are
preceded by a ± sign. This does not mean that both the positive and
negative expressions are valid. Rather, it depends on the quadrant in
which α 2 terminates.

The half-angle formula for sine is derived as follows:

$$\begin{array}{ccl}
{\sin^{2}\theta} & = & \frac{1 - \cos(2\theta)}{2} \\
{\sin^{2}\left( \frac{\alpha}{2} \right)} & = & \frac{1 - \left( {\cos 2 \cdot \frac{\alpha}{2}} \right)}{2} \\
 & = & \frac{1 - \cos\;\alpha}{2} \\
{\sin\left( \frac{\alpha}{2} \right)} & = & {\pm \sqrt{\frac{1 - \cos\;\alpha}{2}}}
\end{array}$$

To derive the half-angle formula for cosine, we have

$$\begin{array}{ccl}
{\cos^{2}\theta} & = & \frac{1 + \cos(2\theta)}{2} \\
{\cos^{2}\left( \frac{\alpha}{2} \right)} & = & \frac{1 + \cos\left( {2 \cdot \frac{\alpha}{2}} \right)}{2} \\
 & = & \frac{1 + \cos\;\alpha}{2} \\
{\cos\left( \frac{\alpha}{2} \right)} & = & {\pm \sqrt{\frac{1 + \cos\;\alpha}{2}}}
\end{array}$$

For the tangent identity, we have

$$\begin{array}{ccl}
{\tan^{2}\theta} & = & \frac{1 - \cos(2\theta)}{1 + \cos(2\theta)} \\
{\tan^{2}\left( \frac{\alpha}{2} \right)} & = & \frac{1 - \cos\left( 2 \cdot \frac{\alpha}{2} \right)}{1 + \cos\left( 2 \cdot \frac{\alpha}{2} \right)} \\
 & = & \frac{1 - \cos\;\alpha}{1 + \cos\;\alpha} \\
{\tan\left( \frac{\alpha}{2} \right)} & = & {\pm \sqrt{\frac{1 - \cos\;\alpha}{1 + \cos\;\alpha}}}
\end{array}$$

:::: {#fs-id2223366 .note}
::: title
Half-Angle Formulas
:::

The half-angle formulas are as follows:

$$\sin\left( \frac{\alpha}{2} \right) = \pm \sqrt{\frac{1 - \cos\;\alpha}{2}}$$

$$\cos\left( \frac{\alpha}{2} \right) = \pm \sqrt{\frac{1 + \cos\;\alpha}{2}}$$

$$\begin{array}{l}
{\tan\left( \frac{\alpha}{2} \right) = \pm \sqrt{\frac{1 - \cos\;\alpha}{1 + \cos\;\alpha}}} \\
{= \frac{\sin\;\alpha}{1 + \cos\;\alpha}} \\
{= \frac{1 - \cos\;\alpha}{\sin\;\alpha}}
\end{array}$$
::::

::: {#Example_07_03_07 .example}
Find sin(15°) using a half-angle formula.

Since 15°= 30° 2 , we use the half-angle formula for sine:

$$\begin{array}{ccl}
{\sin\;\frac{30{^\circ}}{2}} & = & \sqrt{\frac{1 - \cos 30{^\circ}}{2}} \\
 & = & \sqrt{\frac{1 - \frac{\sqrt{3}}{2}}{2}} \\
 & = & \sqrt{\frac{\frac{2 - \sqrt{3}}{2}}{2}} \\
 & = & \sqrt{\frac{2 - \sqrt{3}}{4}} \\
 & = & \frac{\sqrt{2 - \sqrt{3}}}{2}
\end{array}$$

Remember that we can check the answer with a graphing calculator.

Notice that we used only the positive root because sin(15°) is positive.
:::

:::: {#fs-id2784673 .note}
::: title
:::

How To

*Given the tangent of an angle and the quadrant in which the angle lies,
find the exact values of trigonometric functions of half of the angle.*

Draw a triangle to represent the given information.

Determine the correct half-angle formula.

Substitute values into the formula based on the triangle.

Simplify.
::::

::: {#Example_07_03_08 .example}
Given that tanα= 8 15 and α lies in quadrant III, find the exact value
of the following:

ⓐ

sin

(

α

2

)

ⓑ

cos

(

α

2

)

ⓒ

tan

(

α

2

)

Using the given information, we can draw the triangle shown in [\#](#).
Using the Pythagorean Theorem, we find the hypotenuse to be 17.
Therefore, we can calculate sinα=− 8 17 and cosα=− 15 17 .

<figure id="Figure_07_03_003">

</figure>

ⓐ

Before we start, we must remember that if

α

is in quadrant III, then

180°

\<

α

\<

270°

,

so

180°

2

\<

α

2

\<

270°

2

.

This means that the terminal side of

α

2

is in quadrant II, since

90°

\<

α

2

\<

135°

.

To find sin α 2 , we begin by writing the half-angle formula for sine.
Then we substitute the value of the cosine we found from the triangle in
[\#](#) and simplify.

$$\begin{array}{ccl}
{\sin\;\frac{\alpha}{2}} & = & {\pm \sqrt{\frac{1 - \cos\;\alpha}{2}}} \\
 & = & {\pm \sqrt{\frac{1 - \left( {- \frac{15}{17}} \right)}{2}}} \\
 & = & {\pm \sqrt{\frac{\frac{32}{17}}{2}}} \\
 & = & {\pm \sqrt{\frac{32}{17} \cdot \frac{1}{2}}} \\
 & = & {\pm \sqrt{\frac{16}{17}}} \\
 & = & {\pm \frac{4}{\sqrt{17}}} \\
 & = & \frac{4\sqrt{17}}{17}
\end{array}$$

We choose the positive value of sin α 2 because the angle terminates in
quadrant II and sine is positive in quadrant II.

ⓑ

To find

cos

α

2

,

we will write the half-angle formula for cosine, substitute the value of
the cosine we found from the triangle in

, and simplify.

$$\begin{array}{ccl}
{\cos\;\frac{\alpha}{2}} & = & {\pm \sqrt{\frac{1 + \cos\;\alpha}{2}}} \\
 & = & {\pm \sqrt{\frac{1 + \left( {- \frac{15}{17}} \right)}{2}}} \\
 & = & {\pm \sqrt{\frac{\frac{2}{17}}{2}}} \\
 & = & {\pm \sqrt{\frac{2}{17} \cdot \frac{1}{2}}} \\
 & = & {\pm \sqrt{\frac{1}{17}}} \\
 & = & {- \frac{\sqrt{17}}{17}}
\end{array}$$

We choose the negative value of cos α 2 because the angle is in quadrant
II because cosine is negative in quadrant II.

ⓒ

To find

tan

α

2

,

we write the half-angle formula for tangent. Again, we substitute the
value of the cosine we found from the triangle in

and simplify.

$$\begin{array}{ccl}
{\tan\;\frac{\alpha}{2}} & = & {\pm \sqrt{\frac{1 - \cos\;\alpha}{1 + \cos\;\alpha}}} \\
 & = & {\pm \sqrt{\frac{1 - ( - \frac{15}{17})}{1 + ( - \frac{15}{17})}}} \\
 & = & {\pm \sqrt{\frac{\frac{32}{17}}{\frac{2}{17}}}} \\
 & = & {\pm \sqrt{\frac{32}{2}}} \\
 & = & {- \sqrt{16}} \\
 & = & -4
\end{array}$$

We choose the negative value of tan α 2 because α 2 lies in quadrant II,
and tangent is negative in quadrant II.
:::

:::: {#fs-id2235070 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Given that sinα=− 4 5 and α lies in quadrant IV, find the exact value of
cos( α 2 ).

− 2 5
::::

::: {#Example_07_05_09 .example}
Now, we will return to the problem posed at the beginning of the
section. A bicycle ramp is constructed for high-level competition with
an angle of θ formed by the ramp and the ground. Another ramp is to be
constructed half as steep for novice competition. If tanθ= 5 3 for
higher-level competition, what is the measurement of the angle for
novice competition?

Since the angle for novice competition measures half the steepness of
the angle for the high level competition, and tanθ= 5 3 for high
competition, we can find cosθ from the right triangle and the
Pythagorean theorem so that we can use the half-angle identities. See
[\#](#).

$$\begin{array}{rcl}
{3^{2} + 5^{2}} & = & 34 \\
c & = & \sqrt{34}
\end{array}$$

<figure id="Figure_07_03_004">

</figure>

We see that cosθ= 3 34 = 3 34 34 . We can use the half-angle formula for
tangent: tan θ 2 = 1−cosθ 1+cosθ . Since tanθ is in the first quadrant,
so is tan θ 2 .

$$\begin{array}{ccl}
{\tan\;\frac{\theta}{2}} & = & \sqrt{\frac{1 - \frac{3\sqrt{34}}{34}}{1 + \frac{3\sqrt{34}}{34}}} \\
 & = & \sqrt{\frac{\frac{34 - 3\sqrt{34}}{34}}{\frac{34 + 3\sqrt{34}}{34}}} \\
 & = & \sqrt{\frac{34 - 3\sqrt{34}}{34 + 3\sqrt{34}}} \\
 & \approx & 0.57
\end{array}$$

We can take the inverse tangent to find the angle: tan −1 (0.57)≈29.7°.
So the angle of the ramp for novice competition is ≈29.7°.
:::

:::: {#fs-id2454710 .note}
::: title
:::

Media

Access these online resources for additional instruction and practice
with double-angle, half-angle, and reduction formulas.

Double-Angle Identities

Half-Angle Identities
::::

# Key Equations {#fs-id2034648}

  ----------------------- -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Double-angle formulas   sin(2θ) = 2sinθcosθ cos(2θ) = cos 2 θ− sin 2 θ = 1−2 sin 2 θ = 2 cos 2 θ−1 tan(2θ) = 2tanθ 1− tan 2 θ
  Reduction formulas      sin 2 θ = 1−cos(2θ) 2 cos 2 θ = 1+cos(2θ) 2 tan 2 θ = 1−cos(2θ) 1+cos(2θ)
  Half-angle formulas     sin α 2 = ± 1−cosα 2 cos α 2 = ± 1+cosα 2 tan α 2 = ± 1−cosα 1+cosα = sinα 1+cosα = 1−cosα sinα
  ----------------------- -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Key Concepts {#fs-id1792287}

Double-angle identities are derived from the sum formulas of the
fundamental trigonometric functions: sine, cosine, and tangent. See

,

,

, and

.

Reduction formulas are especially useful in calculus, as they allow us
to reduce the power of the trigonometric term. See

and

.

Half-angle formulas allow us to find the value of trigonometric
functions involving half-angles, whether the original angle is known or
not. See

,

, and

.

# Section Exercises {#fs-id1596266}

## Verbal {#fs-id1596270}

Explain how to determine the reduction identities from the double-angle
identity cos( 2x )= cos 2 x− sin 2 x.

Use the Pythagorean identities and isolate the squared term.

Explain how to determine the double-angle formula for tan(2x) using the
double-angle formulas for cos(2x) and sin(2x).

We can determine the half-angle formula for tan( x 2 )= 1−cosx 1+cosx by
dividing the formula for sin( x 2 ) by cos( x 2 ). Explain how to
determine two formulas for tan( x 2 ) that do not involve any square
roots.

1−cosx sinx , sinx 1+cosx , multiplying the top and bottom by 1−cosx and
1+cosx , respectively.

For the half-angle formula given in the previous exercise for tan( x 2
), explain why dividing by 0 is not a concern. (Hint: examine the values
of cosx necessary for the denominator to be 0.)

## Algebraic {#fs-id2084633}

For the following exercises, find the exact values of a) sin( 2x ), b)
cos( 2x ), and c) tan( 2x ) without solving for x.

If sinx= 1 8 , and x is in quadrant I.

a\) 3 7 32 b) 31 32 c) 3 7 31

If cosx= 2 3 , and x is in quadrant I.

If cosx=− 1 2 , and x   is in quadrant III.

a\) 3 2 b) − 1 2 c) − 3

If tanx=−8, and x is in quadrant IV.

For the following exercises, find the values of the six trigonometric
functions if the conditions provided hold.

cos(2θ)= 3 5 and 90°≤θ≤180°

cosθ=− 2 5 5 ,sinθ= 5 5 ,tanθ=− 1 2 ,cscθ= 5 ,secθ=− 5 2 ,cotθ=−2

cos(2θ)= 1 2 and 180°≤θ≤270°

For the following exercises, simplify to one trigonometric expression.

2sin( π 4 )cos( π 4 )

sin( π 2 )

4sin( π 8 )cos( π 8 )

For the following exercises, find the exact value using half-angle
formulas.

sin( π 8 )

2− 2 2

cos( − 11π 12 )

sin( 11π 12 )

2− 3 2

cos( 7π 8 )

tan( 5π 12 )

2+ 3

tan( − 3π 12 )

tan( − 3π 8 )

−1− 2

For the following exercises, find the exact values of a) sin( x 2 ), b)
cos( x 2 ), and c) tan( x 2 ) without solving for x, when 0 ≤ x \< 2 π

If tanx=− 4 3 , and x is in quadrant IV.

If sinx=− 12 13 , and x is in quadrant III.

a\) 3 13 13 b) − 2 13 13 c) − 3 2

If cscx=7, and  x   is in quadrant II.

If secx=−4, and x is in quadrant II.

a\) 10 4 b) 6 4 c) 15 3

For the following exercises, use [\#](#) to find the requested half and
double angles.

<figure id="Figure_07_03_201">

</figure>

Find sin( 2θ ),cos(2θ), and tan(2θ).

Find sin(2α),cos(2α), and tan(2α).

120 169 ,-- 119 169 ,-- 120 119

Find sin( θ 2 ),cos( θ 2 ), and tan( θ 2 ).

Find sin( α 2 ),cos( α 2 ), and tan( α 2 ).

2 13 13 , 3 13 13 , 2 3

For the following exercises, simplify each expression. Do not evaluate.

cos 2 (28°)− sin 2 (28°)

2 cos 2 (37°)−1

cos(74°)

1−2 sin 2 (17°)

cos 2 (9x)− sin 2 (9x)

cos(18x)

4sin(8x)cos(8x)

6sin(5x)cos(5x)

3sin(10x)

For the following exercises, prove the given identity.

( sint−cost ) 2 =1−sin( 2t )

sin( 2x )=−2sin( −x )cos( −x )

−2sin( −x )cos( −x )=−2(−sin( x )cos( x ))=sin( 2x )

cotx−tanx=2cot( 2x )

sin( 2θ ) 1+cos( 2θ ) tan 2 θ= tan3 θ

sin(2θ) 1+cos(2θ) tan 2 θ = 2sin(θ)cos(θ) 1+ cos 2 θ− sin 2 θ tan 2 θ=
2sin(θ)cos(θ) 2 cos 2 θ tan 2 θ = sin(θ) cosθ tan 2 θ= cot(θ) tan 2 θ =
tan3 θ

For the following exercises, rewrite the expression with an exponent no
higher than 1.

cos 2 (5x)

cos 2 (6x)

1+cos(12x) 2

sin 4 (8x)

sin 4 (3x)

3+cos(12x)−4cos(6x) 8

cos 2 x sin 4 x

cos 4 x sin 2 x

2+cos(2x)−2cos(4x)−cos(6x) 32

tan 2 x sin 2 x

## Technology {#fs-id2957879}

For the following exercises, reduce the equations to powers of one, and
then check the answer graphically.

tan 4 x

3+cos(4x)−4cos(2x) 3+cos(4x)+4cos(2x)

sin 2 (2x)

sin 2 x cos 2 x

1−cos(4x) 8

tan 2 xsinx

tan 4 x cos 2 x

3+cos(4x)−4cos(2x) 4(cos(2x)+1)

cos 2 xsin( 2x )

cos 2 ( 2x )sinx

( 1+cos( 4x ) )sinx 2

tan 2 ( x 2 )sinx

For the following exercises, algebraically find an equivalent function,
only in terms of sinx and/or cosx, and then check the answer by graphing
both functions.

sin(4x)

4sinxcosx( cos 2 x− sin 2 x )

cos(4x)

## Extensions {#fs-id2796973}

For the following exercises, prove the identities.

sin( 2x )= 2tanx 1+ tan 2 x

2tanx 1+ tan 2 x = 2sinx cosx 1+ sin 2 x cos 2 x = 2sinx cosx cos 2 x+
sin 2 x cos 2 x = 2sinx cosx . cos 2 x 1 =2sinxcosx=sin(2x)

cos(2α)= 1− tan 2 α 1+ tan 2 α

tan(2x)= 2sinxcosx 2 cos 2 x−1

2sinxcosx 2 cos 2 x−1 = sin(2x) cos(2x) =tan(2x)

( sin 2 x−1 ) 2 =cos( 2x )+ sin 4 x

sin( 3x )=3sinx cos 2 x− sin 3 x

sin(x+2x) = sinxcos(2x)+sin(2x)cosx = sinx( cos 2 x− sin 2 x
)+2sinxcosxcosx = sinx cos 2 x− sin 3 x+2sinx cos 2 x = 3sinx cos 2 x−
sin 3 x

cos( 3x )= cos 3 x−3 sin 2 xcosx

1+cos( 2t ) sin( 2t )−cost = 2cost 2sint−1

1+cos(2t) sin(2t)−cost = 1+2 cos 2 t−1 2sintcost−cost = 2 cos 2 t
cost(2sint−1) = 2cost 2sint−1

sin( 16x )=16sinxcosxcos( 2x )cos( 4x )cos( 8x )

cos( 16x )=( cos 2 ( 4x )− sin 2 ( 4x )−sin( 8x ) )( cos 2 ( 4x )− sin 2
( 4x )+sin( 8x ) )

( cos 2 (4x)− sin 2 (4x)−sin(8x))( cos 2 (4x)− sin 2 (4x)+sin(8x) ) = =
(cos(8x)−sin(8x))(cos(8x)+sin(8x)) = cos 2 (8x)− sin 2 (8x) = cos(16x)

# 

double-angle formulas

identities derived from the sum formulas for sine, cosine, and tangent
in which the angles are equal

half-angle formulas

identities derived from the reduction formulas and used to determine
half-angle values of trigonometric functions

reduction formulas

identities derived from the double-angle formulas and used to reduce the
power of a trigonometric function
