m51291

> In this section, you will:
>
> Express products as sums.
>
> Express sums as products.

459102d9-1fe8-4f1e-b89e-32d5c87e6313

<figure id="Figure_07_04_002">

</figure>

A band marches down the field creating an amazing sound that bolsters
the crowd. That sound travels as a wave that can be interpreted using
trigonometric functions. For example, [\#](#) represents a sound wave
for the musical note A. In this section, we will investigate
trigonometric identities that are the foundation of everyday phenomena
such as sound waves.

<figure id="Figure_07_04_001">

</figure>

# Expressing Products as Sums {#fs-id2550804}

We have already learned a number of formulas useful for expanding or
simplifying trigonometric expressions, but sometimes we may need to
express the product of cosine and sine as a sum. We can use the
product-to-sum formulas, which express products of trigonometric
functions as sums. Let's investigate the cosine identity first and then
the sine identity.

## Expressing Products as Sums for Cosine {#fs-id1343301}

We can derive the product-to-sum formula from the sum and difference
identities for cosine. If we add the two equations, we get:

$$\begin{array}{l}
\underset{\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_}{\begin{array}{rll}
{\cos\;\alpha\;\cos\;\beta+\sin\;\alpha\;\sin\;\beta} & = & {\cos(\alpha-\beta)} \\
{+\;\;\cos\;\alpha\;\cos\;\beta-\sin\;\alpha\;\sin\;\beta} & = & {\cos(\alpha+\beta)}
\end{array}} \\
\begin{array}{rll}
{\mspace{103mu} 2\;\cos\;\alpha\;\cos\;\beta} & = & {\cos(\alpha - \beta) + \cos(\alpha + \beta)}
\end{array}
\end{array}$$

Then, we divide by 2 to isolate the product of cosines:

$$\cos\;\alpha\;\cos\;\beta = \frac{1}{2}\lbrack\cos(\alpha - \beta) + \cos(\alpha + \beta)\rbrack$$

:::: {#fs-id2077607 .note}
::: title
:::

How To

*Given a product of cosines, express as a sum.*

Write the formula for the product of cosines.

Substitute the given angles into the formula.

Simplify.
::::

::: {#Example_07_04_01 .example}
Write the following product of cosines as a sum: 2cos( 7x 2 )cos 3x 2 .

We begin by writing the formula for the product of cosines:

$$\cos\;\alpha\;\cos\;\beta = \frac{1}{2}\left\lbrack {\cos\left( {\alpha - \beta} \right) + \cos\left( {\alpha + \beta} \right)} \right\rbrack$$

We can then substitute the given angles into the formula and simplify.

$$\begin{array}{ccl}
{2\;\cos\left( \frac{7x}{2} \right)\cos\left( \frac{3x}{2} \right)} & = & {(2)\left( \frac{1}{2} \right)\left\lbrack {\cos\left( {\frac{7x}{2} - \frac{3x}{2}} \right)) + \cos\left( {\frac{7x}{2} + \frac{3x}{2}} \right)} \right\rbrack} \\
 & = & \left\lbrack {\cos\left( \frac{4x}{2} \right) + \cos\left( \frac{10x}{2} \right)} \right\rbrack \\
 & = & {\cos\; 2x + \cos\; 5x}
\end{array}$$
:::

:::: {#fs-id2454024 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Use the product-to-sum formula to write the product as a sum or
difference: cos( 2θ )cos( 4θ ).

1 2 ( cos6θ+cos2θ )
::::

## Expressing the Product of Sine and Cosine as a Sum {#fs-id1612969}

Next, we will derive the product-to-sum formula for sine and cosine from
the sum and difference formulas for sine. If we add the sum and
difference identities, we get:

$$\begin{array}{l}
\underset{\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_}{\begin{array}{crll}
 & {\ \sin(\alpha+\beta)} & = & {\sin\;\alpha\;\cos\;\beta+\cos\;\alpha\;\sin\;\beta} \\
+ & {\mspace{70mu}{\sin(\alpha-\beta)}} & = & {\sin\;\alpha\;\cos\;\beta-\cos\;\alpha\;\sin\;\beta}
\end{array}} \\
\begin{array}{rll}
{\sin(\alpha + \beta) + \sin(\alpha - \beta)} & = & {2\;\sin\;\alpha\;\cos\;\beta}
\end{array}
\end{array}$$

Then, we divide by 2 to isolate the product of cosine and sine:

$$\sin\;\alpha\;\cos\;\beta = \frac{1}{2}\left\lbrack {\sin\left( {\alpha + \beta} \right) + \sin\left( {\alpha - \beta} \right)} \right\rbrack$$

::: {#Example_07_04_02 .example}
Express the following product as a sum containing only sine or cosine
and no products: sin( 4θ )cos( 2θ ).

Write the formula for the product of sine and cosine. Then substitute
the given values into the formula and simplify.

$$\begin{array}{ccl}
{\sin\;\alpha\;\cos\;\beta} & = & {\frac{1}{2}\lbrack\sin(\alpha + \beta) + \sin(\alpha - \beta)\rbrack} \\
{\sin(4\theta)\cos(2\theta)} & = & {\frac{1}{2}\lbrack\sin(4\theta + 2\theta) + \sin(4\theta - 2\theta)\rbrack} \\
 & = & {\frac{1}{2}\lbrack\sin(6\theta) + \sin(2\theta)\rbrack}
\end{array}$$
:::

:::: {#fs-id2467415 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Use the product-to-sum formula to write the product as a sum: sin( x+y
)cos( x−y ).

1 2 ( sin2x+sin2y )
::::

## Expressing Products of Sines in Terms of Cosine {#fs-id1475872}

Expressing the product of sines in terms of cosine is also derived from
the sum and difference identities for cosine. In this case, we will
first subtract the two cosine formulas:

$$\begin{array}{l}
\underset{\operatorname{\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_}}{\begin{array}{l}
\begin{array}{l}
 \\
{\cos\left( {\alpha - \beta} \right) = \cos\;\alpha\;\cos\;\beta + \sin\;\alpha\;\sin\;\beta}
\end{array} \\
{- \mspace{9mu}\cos\left( {\alpha + \beta} \right) = - \left( {\cos\;\alpha\;\cos\;\beta - \sin\;\alpha\;\sin\;\beta} \right)}
\end{array}} \\
{\cos\left( {\alpha - \beta} \right) - \cos\left( {\alpha + \beta} \right) = 2\;\sin\;\alpha\;\sin\;\beta}
\end{array}$$

Then, we divide by 2 to isolate the product of sines:

$$\sin\;\alpha\;\sin\;\beta = \frac{1}{2}\left\lbrack {\cos\left( {\alpha - \beta} \right) - \cos\left( {\alpha + \beta} \right)} \right\rbrack$$

Similarly we could express the product of cosines in terms of sine or
derive other product-to-sum formulas.

:::: {#fs-id698588 .note}
::: title
The Product-to-Sum Formulas
:::

The product-to-sum formulas are as follows:

$$\begin{array}{rcl}
{\mspace{8mu}\cos\;\alpha\;\cos\;\beta} & = & {\frac{1}{2}\lbrack\cos(\alpha - \beta) + \cos(\alpha + \beta)\rbrack}
\end{array}$$

$$\begin{array}{rcl}
{\sin\;\alpha\;\cos\;\beta} & = & {\frac{1}{2}\lbrack\sin(\alpha + \beta) + \sin(\alpha - \beta)\rbrack}
\end{array}$$

$$\begin{array}{rcl}
{\mspace{9mu}\sin\;\alpha\;\sin\;\beta} & = & {\frac{1}{2}\lbrack\cos(\alpha - \beta) - \cos(\alpha + \beta)\rbrack}
\end{array}$$

$$\begin{array}{rcl}
{\cos\;\alpha\;\sin\;\beta} & = & {\frac{1}{2}\lbrack\sin(\alpha + \beta) - \sin(\alpha - \beta)\rbrack}
\end{array}$$
::::

::: {#Example_07_04_03 .example}
Write cos(3θ)cos(5θ) as a sum or difference.

We have the product of cosines, so we begin by writing the related
formula. Then we substitute the given angles and simplify.

$$\begin{array}{cclc}
{\cos\;\alpha\;\cos\;\beta} & = & {\frac{1}{2}\lbrack\cos(\alpha - \beta) + \cos(\alpha + \beta)\rbrack} & \\
{\cos(3\theta)\cos(5\theta)} & = & {\frac{1}{2}\lbrack\cos(3\theta - 5\theta) + \cos(3\theta + 5\theta)\rbrack} & \\
 & = & {\frac{1}{2}\lbrack\cos(2\theta) + \cos(8\theta)\rbrack} & {\text{Use~even-odd~identity}.}
\end{array}$$
:::

:::: {#fs-id2097944 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Use the product-to-sum formula to evaluate cos 11π 12 cos π 12 .

−2− 3 4
::::

# Expressing Sums as Products {#fs-id1308495}

Some problems require the reverse of the process we just used. The
sum-to-product formulas allow us to express sums of sine or cosine as
products. These formulas can be derived from the product-to-sum
identities. For example, with a few substitutions, we can derive the
sum-to-product identity for sine. Let u+v 2 =α and u−v 2 =β.

Then,

$$\begin{array}{ccl}
{\alpha + \beta} & = & {\frac{u + v}{2} + \frac{u - v}{2}} \\
 & = & \frac{2u}{2} \\
 & = & u \\
{\alpha - \beta} & = & {\frac{u + v}{2} - \frac{u - v}{2}} \\
 & = & \frac{2v}{2} \\
 & = & v
\end{array}$$

Thus, replacing α and β in the product-to-sum formula with the
substitute expressions, we have

$$\begin{array}{rclc}
{\sin\;\alpha\;\cos\;\beta} & = & {\frac{1}{2}\lbrack\sin(\alpha + \beta) + \sin(\alpha - \beta)\rbrack} & \\
{\sin\left( \frac{u + v}{2} \right)\cos\left( \frac{u - v}{2} \right)} & = & {\frac{1}{2}\lbrack\sin\; u + \sin\; v\rbrack} & {\text{Substitute~for}(\alpha + \beta)\text{~and~}(\alpha - \beta)} \\
{2\;\sin\left( \frac{u + v}{2} \right)\cos\left( \frac{u - v}{2} \right)} & = & {\sin\; u + \sin\; v} & 
\end{array}$$

The other sum-to-product identities are derived similarly.

:::: {#fs-id1332136 .note}
::: title
Sum-to-Product Formulas
:::

The sum-to-product formulas are as follows:

$$\begin{array}{rcl}
{\mspace{7mu}\sin\;\alpha + \sin\;\beta} & = & {2\sin\left( \frac{\alpha + \beta}{2} \right)\cos\left( \frac{\alpha - \beta}{2} \right)}
\end{array}$$

$$\begin{array}{rcl}
{\;\sin\;\alpha - \sin\;\beta} & = & {2\sin\left( \frac{\alpha - \beta}{2} \right)\cos\left( \frac{\alpha + \beta}{2} \right)}
\end{array}$$

$$\begin{array}{rcl}
{\mspace{7mu}\cos\;\alpha - \cos\;\beta} & = & {-2\sin\left( \frac{\alpha + \beta}{2} \right)\sin\left( \frac{\alpha - \beta}{2} \right)}
\end{array}$$

$$\begin{array}{rcl}
{\cos\;\alpha + \cos\;\beta} & = & {2\cos\left( \frac{\alpha + \beta}{2} \right)\cos\left( \frac{\alpha - \beta}{2} \right)}
\end{array}$$
::::

::: {#Example_07_04_04 .example}
Write the following difference of sines expression as a product: sin( 4θ
)−sin( 2θ ).

We begin by writing the formula for the difference of sines.

$$\sin\;\alpha - \sin\;\beta = 2\sin\left( \frac{\alpha - \beta}{2} \right)\cos\left( \frac{\alpha + \beta}{2} \right)$$

Substitute the values into the formula, and simplify.

$$\begin{array}{ccl}
{\sin(4\theta) - \sin(2\theta)} & = & {2\sin\left( \frac{4\theta - 2\theta}{2} \right)\;\cos\left( \frac{4\theta + 2\theta}{2} \right)} \\
 & = & {2\sin\left( \frac{2\theta}{2} \right)\;\cos\left( \frac{6\theta}{2} \right)} \\
 & = & {2\;\sin\;\theta\;\cos(3\theta)}
\end{array}$$
:::

:::: {#fs-id2237285 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Use the sum-to-product formula to write the sum as a product: sin( 3θ
)+sin( θ ).

2sin( 2θ )cos( θ )
::::

::: {#Example_07_04_05 .example}
Evaluate cos(15°)−cos(75°). Check the answer with a graphing calculator.

We begin by writing the formula for the difference of cosines.

$$\cos\;\alpha - \cos\;\beta = - 2\;\sin\left( \frac{\alpha + \beta}{2} \right)\;\sin\left( \frac{\alpha - \beta}{2} \right)$$

Then we substitute the given angles and simplify.

$$\begin{array}{ccl}
{\cos(15{^\circ}) - \cos(75{^\circ})} & = & {-2\sin\left( \frac{15{^\circ} + 75{^\circ}}{2} \right)\;\sin\left( \frac{15{^\circ} - 75{^\circ}}{2} \right)} \\
 & = & {-2\sin(45{^\circ})\;\sin(-30{^\circ})} \\
 & = & {-2\left( \frac{\sqrt{2}}{2} \right)\left( {- \frac{1}{2}} \right)} \\
 & = & \frac{\sqrt{2}}{2}
\end{array}$$
:::

::: {#Example_07_04_06 .example}
Prove the identity:

$$\frac{\cos\left( {4t} \right) - \cos\left( {2t} \right)}{\sin\left( {4t} \right) + \sin\left( {2t} \right)} = - \tan\; t$$

We will start with the left side, the more complicated side of the
equation, and rewrite the expression until it matches the right side.

$$\begin{array}{ccl}
\frac{\cos(4t) - \cos(2t)}{\sin(4t) + \sin(2t)} & = & \frac{- 2\;\sin\left( \frac{4t + 2t}{2} \right)\;\sin\left( \frac{4t - 2t}{2} \right)}{2\;\sin\left( \frac{4t + 2t}{2} \right)\;\cos\left( \frac{4t - 2t}{2} \right)} \\
 & = & \frac{- 2\;\sin(3t)\sin\; t}{2\;\sin(3t)\cos\; t} \\
 & = & \frac{- \cancel{2}\cancel{\sin(3t)}\sin\; t}{\cancel{2}\cancel{\sin(3t)}\cos\; t} \\
 & = & {- \frac{\sin\; t}{\cos\; t}} \\
 & = & {- \tan\; t}
\end{array}$$

Recall that verifying trigonometric identities has its own set of rules.
The procedures for solving an equation are not the same as the
procedures for verifying an identity. When we prove an identity, we pick
one side to work on and make substitutions until that side is
transformed into the other side.
:::

::: {#Example_07_04_07 .example}
Verify the identity csc 2 θ−2= cos(2θ) sin 2 θ .

For verifying this equation, we are bringing together several of the
identities. We will use the double-angle formula and the reciprocal
identities. We will work with the right side of the equation and rewrite
it until it matches the left side.

$$\begin{array}{ccl}
\frac{\cos(2\theta)}{\sin^{2}\theta} & = & \frac{1 - 2\;\sin^{2}\theta}{\sin^{2}\theta} \\
 & = & {\frac{1}{\sin^{2}\theta} - \frac{2\;\sin^{2}\theta}{\sin^{2}\theta}} \\
 & = & {\csc^{2}\theta - 2}
\end{array}$$
:::

:::: {#fs-id2011025 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Verify the identity tanθcotθ− cos 2 θ= sin 2 θ.

tanθcotθ− cos 2 θ = ( sinθ cosθ )( cosθ sinθ )− cos 2 θ = 1− cos 2 θ =
sin 2 θ
::::

:::: {#fs-id1357476 .note}
::: title
:::

Media

Access these online resources for additional instruction and practice
with the product-to-sum and sum-to-product identities.

Sum to Product Identities

Sum to Product and Product to Sum Identities
::::

# Key Equations {#fs-id1871279}

  ------------------------- ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Product-to-sum Formulas   cosαcosβ = 1 2 \[cos(α−β)+cos(α+β)\] sinαcosβ = 1 2 \[sin(α+β)+sin(α−β)\] sinαsinβ = 1 2 \[cos(α−β)−cos(α+β)\] cosαsinβ = 1 2 \[sin(α+β)−sin(α−β)\]
  Sum-to-product Formulas   sinα+sinβ = 2sin( α+β 2 )cos( α−β 2 ) sinα−sinβ = 2sin( α−β 2 )cos( α+β 2 ) cosα−cosβ = −2sin( α+β 2 )sin( α−β 2 ) cosα+cosβ = 2cos( α+β 2 )cos( α−β 2 )
  ------------------------- ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Key Concepts {#fs-id1612050}

From the sum and difference identities, we can derive the product-to-sum
formulas and the sum-to-product formulas for sine and cosine.

We can use the product-to-sum formulas to rewrite products of sines,
products of cosines, and products of sine and cosine as sums or
differences of sines and cosines. See

,

, and

.

We can also derive the sum-to-product identities from the product-to-sum
identities using substitution.

We can use the sum-to-product formulas to rewrite sum or difference of
sines, cosines, or products sine and cosine as products of sines and
cosines. See

.

Trigonometric expressions are often simpler to evaluate using the
formulas. See

.

The identities can be verified using other formulas or by converting the
expressions to sines and cosines. To verify an identity, we choose the
more complicated side of the equals sign and rewrite it until it is
transformed into the other side. See

and

.

# Section Exercises {#fs-id3068869}

## Verbal {#fs-id2438692}

Starting with the product to sum formula sinαcosβ= 1 2
\[sin(α+β)+sin(α−β)\], explain how to determine the formula for
cosαsinβ.

Substitute  α   into cosine and  β   into sine and evaluate.

Provide two different methods of calculating cos(195°)cos(105°), one of
which uses the product to sum. Which method is easier?

Describe a situation where we would convert an equation from a sum to a
product and give an example.

Answers will vary. There are some equations that involve a sum of two
trig expressions where when converted to a product are easier to solve.
For example: sin(3x)+sinx cosx =1.   When converting the numerator to a
product the equation becomes: 2sin(2x)cosx cosx =1

Describe a situation where we would convert an equation from a product
to a sum, and give an example.

## Algebraic {#fs-id926570}

For the following exercises, rewrite the product as a sum or difference.

16sin(16x)sin(11x)

8( cos( 5x )−cos( 27x ) )

20cos( 36t )cos( 6t )

2sin( 5x )cos( 3x )

sin( 2x )+sin( 8x )

10cos( 5x )sin( 10x )

sin( −x )sin( 5x )

1 2 ( cos( 6x )−cos( 4x ) )

sin( 3x )cos( 5x )

For the following exercises, rewrite the sum or difference as a product.

cos( 6t )+cos( 4t )

2cos( 5t )cost

sin( 3x )+sin( 7x )

cos( 7x )+cos( −7x )

2cos( 7x )

sin( 3x )−sin( −3x )

cos( 3x )+cos( 9x )

2cos( 6x )cos( 3x )

sinh−sin( 3h )

For the following exercises, evaluate the product for the following
using a sum or difference of two functions. Evaluate exactly.

cos( 45° )cos( 15° )

1 4 ( 1+ 3 )

cos( 45° )sin( 15° )

sin( −345° )sin( −15° )

1 4 ( 3 −2 )

sin( 195° )cos( 15° )

sin( −45° )sin( −15° )

1 4 ( 3 −1 )

For the following exercises, evaluate the product using a sum or
difference of two functions. Leave in terms of sine and cosine.

cos( 23° )sin( 17° )

2sin( 100° )sin( 20° )

cos( 80° )−cos( 120° )

2sin(−100°)sin(−20°)

sin( 213° )cos( 8° )

1 2 (sin(221°)+sin(205°))

2cos(56°)cos(47°)

For the following exercises, rewrite the sum as a product of two
functions. Leave in terms of sine and cosine.

sin(76°)+sin(14°)

2 cos( 31° )

cos( 58° )−cos( 12° )

sin(101°)−sin(32°)

2cos(66.5°)sin(34.5°)

cos( 100° )+cos( 200° )

sin(−1°)+sin(−2°)

2sin( −1.5° )cos( 0.5° )

For the following exercises, prove the identity.

cos(a+b) cos(a−b) = 1−tanatanb 1+tanatanb

4sin( 3x )cos( 4x )=2sin( 7x )−2sinx

2sin(7x)−2sinx=2sin(4x+3x)−2sin(4x−3x)=
2(sin(4x)cos(3x)+sin(3x)cos(4x))−2(sin(4x)cos(3x)−sin(3x)cos(4x))=
2sin(4x)cos(3x)+2sin(3x)cos(4x))−2sin(4x)cos(3x)+2sin(3x)cos(4x))=
4sin(3x)cos(4x)

6cos( 8x )sin( 2x ) sin( −6x ) =−3sin( 10x )csc( 6x )+3

sinx+sin( 3x )=4sinx cos 2 x

sinx+sin(3x) = 2sin( 4x 2 )cos( −2x 2 )= 2sin(2x)cosx =
2(2sinxcosx)cosx= 4sinx cos 2 x

2( cos 3 x−cosx sin 2 x )=cos( 3x )+cosx

2tanxcos( 3x )=secx( sin( 4x )−sin( 2x ) )

2tanxcos( 3x )= 2sinxcos(3x) cosx = 2(.5(sin(4x)−sin(2x))) cosx = 1 cosx
( sin(4x)−sin(2x) )=secx( sin( 4x )−sin( 2x ) )

cos( a+b )+cos( a−b )=2cosacosb

## Numeric {#fs-id2261894}

For the following exercises, rewrite the sum as a product of two
functions or the product as a sum of two functions. Give your answer in
terms of sines and cosines. Then evaluate the final answer numerically,
rounded to four decimal places.

cos(58°)+cos(12°)

2cos(35°)cos(23°),1.5081

sin(2°)−sin(3°)

cos(44°)−cos(22°)

−2sin(33°)sin(11°),−0.2078

cos(176°)sin(9°)

sin(−14°)sin(85°)

1 2 (cos(99°)−cos(71°)),−0.2410

## Technology {#fs-id1872573}

For the following exercises, algebraically determine whether each of the
given equation is an identity. If it is not an identity, replace the
right-hand side with an expression equivalent to the left side. Verify
the results by graphing both expressions on a calculator.

2sin(2x)sin(3x)=cosx−cos(5x)

cos( 10θ )+cos( 6θ ) cos( 6θ )−cos( 10θ ) =cot( 2θ )cot( 8θ )

It is an identity.

sin( 3x )−sin( 5x ) cos( 3x )+cos( 5x ) =tanx

2cos(2x)cosx+sin(2x)sinx=2sinx

It is not an identity, but 2 cos 3 x is.

sin( 2x )+sin( 4x ) sin( 2x )−sin( 4x ) =−tan( 3x )cotx

For the following exercises, simplify the expression to one term, then
graph the original function and your simplified version to verify they
are identical.

sin( 9t )−sin( 3t ) cos( 9t )+cos( 3t )

tan( 3t )

2sin( 8x )cos( 6x )−sin( 2x )

sin( 3x )−sinx sinx

2cos( 2x )

cos( 5x )+cos( 3x ) sin( 5x )+sin( 3x )

sinxcos( 15x )−cosxsin( 15x )

−sin(14x)

## Extensions {#fs-id1548151}

For the following exercises, prove the following sum-to-product
formulas.

sinx−siny=2sin( x−y 2 )cos( x+y 2 )

cosx+cosy=2cos( x+y 2 )cos( x−y 2 )

Start with cosx+cosy. Make a substitution and let x=α+β and let y=α−β,
so cosx+cosy becomes
cos(α+β)+cos(α−β)=cosαcosβ−sinαsinβ+cosαcosβ+sinαsinβ= 2cosαcosβ

Since x=α+β and y=α−β, we can solve for α and β in terms of *x* and *y*
and substitute in for 2cosαcosβ and get 2cos( x+y 2 )cos( x−y 2 ).

For the following exercises, prove the identity.

sin(6x)+sin(4x) sin(6x)−sin(4x) =tan(5x)cotx

cos(3x)+cosx cos(3x)−cosx =−cot(2x)cotx

cos( 3x )+cosx cos( 3x )−cosx = 2cos( 2x )cosx −2sin( 2x )sinx =−cot( 2x
)cotx

cos(6y)+cos(8y) sin(6y)−sin(4y) =cotycos(7y)sec(5y)

cos( 2y )−cos( 4y ) sin( 2y )+sin( 4y ) =tany

cos(2y)−cos(4y) sin(2y)+sin(4y) = −2sin(3y)sin(−y) 2sin(3y)cosy =
2sin(3y)sin(y) 2sin(3y)cosy = tany

sin( 10x )−sin( 2x ) cos( 10x )+cos( 2x ) =tan( 4x )

cosx−cos(3x)=4 sin 2 xcosx

cosx−cos( 3x )=−2sin(2x)sin(−x)= 2(2sinxcosx)sinx=4 sin 2 xcosx

(cos(2x)−cos(4x)) 2 + (sin(4x)+sin(2x)) 2 =4 sin 2 (3x)

tan( π 4 −t )= 1−tant 1+tant

tan( π 4 −t )= tan( π 4 )−tant 1+tan( π 4 )tan(t) = 1−tant 1+tant

# 

product-to-sum formula

a trigonometric identity that allows the writing of a product of
trigonometric functions as a sum or difference of trigonometric
functions

sum-to-product formula

a trigonometric identity that allows, by using substitution, the writing
of a sum of trigonometric functions as a product of trigonometric
functions
