m51292

> In this section, you will:
>
> Solve linear trigonometric equations in sine and cosine.
>
> Solve equations involving a single trigonometric function.
>
> Solve trigonometric equations using a calculator.
>
> Solve trigonometric equations that are quadratic in form.
>
> Solve trigonometric equations using fundamental identities.
>
> Solve trigonometric equations with multiple angles.
>
> Solve right triangle problems.

fd9354bc-6e98-47ba-87e7-762a28fb7c9b

<figure id="Figure_07_05_001">

</figure>

Thales of Miletus (circa 625--547 BC) is known as the founder of
geometry. The legend is that he calculated the height of the Great
Pyramid of Giza in Egypt using the theory of *similar triangles*, which
he developed by measuring the shadow of his staff. He reasoned that when
the height of his staff\'s shadow was exactly equal to the actual height
of the staff, then the height of the nearby pyramid\'s shadow must also
be equal to the height of the actual pyramid. Since the structures and
their shadows were creating a right triangle with two equal sides, they
were similar triangles. By measuring the length of the pyramid\'s shadow
at that moment, he could obtain the height of the pyramid. Based on
proportions, this theory has applications in a number of areas,
including fractal geometry, engineering, and architecture. Often, the
angle of elevation and the angle of depression are found using similar
triangles.

In earlier sections of this chapter, we looked at trigonometric
identities. Identities are true for all values in the domain of the
variable. In this section, we begin our study of trigonometric equations
to study real-world scenarios such as the finding the dimensions of the
pyramids.

# Solving Linear Trigonometric Equations in Sine and Cosine {#fs-id2123717}

Trigonometric equations are, as the name implies, equations that involve
trigonometric functions. Similar in many ways to solving polynomial
equations or rational equations, only specific values of the variable
will be solutions, if there are solutions at all. Often we will solve a
trigonometric equation over a specified interval. However, just as
often, we will be asked to find all possible solutions, and as
trigonometric functions are periodic, solutions are repeated within each
period. In other words, trigonometric equations may have an infinite
number of solutions. Additionally, like rational equations, the domain
of the function must be considered before we assume that any solution is
valid. The period of both the sine function and the cosine function is
2π. In other words, every 2π units, the *y-*values repeat. If we need to
find all possible solutions, then we must add 2πk, where k is an
integer, to the initial solution. Recall the rule that gives the format
for stating all possible solutions for a function where the period is
2π:

$$\sin\;\theta = \sin(\theta \pm 2k\pi)$$

There are similar rules for indicating all possible solutions for the
other trigonometric functions. Solving trigonometric equations requires
the same techniques as solving algebraic equations. We read the equation
from left to right, horizontally, like a sentence. We look for known
patterns, factor, find common denominators, and substitute certain
expressions with a variable to make solving a more straightforward
process. However, with trigonometric equations, we also have the
advantage of using the identities we developed in the previous sections.

::: {#Example_07_05_01 .example}
Find all possible exact solutions for the equation cosθ= 1 2 .

From the unit circle, we know that

$$\begin{array}{rcl}
{\cos\;\theta} & = & \frac{1}{2} \\
\theta & = & {\frac{\pi}{3},\frac{5\pi}{3}}
\end{array}$$

These are the solutions in the interval \[ 0,2π \]. All possible
solutions are given by

$$\theta = \frac{\pi}{3} \pm 2k\pi\text{~~and~~}\theta = \frac{5\pi}{3} \pm 2k\pi$$

where k is an integer.
:::

::: {#Example_07_05_02 .example}
Find all possible exact solutions for the equation sint= 1 2 .

Solving for all possible values of *t* means that solutions include
angles beyond the period of 2π. From [\#](#), we can see that the
solutions are t= π 6 and t= 5π 6 . But the problem is asking for all
possible values that solve the equation. Therefore, the answer is

$$t = \frac{\pi}{6} \pm 2\pi k\text{~~and~~}t = \frac{5\pi}{6} \pm 2\pi k$$

where k is an integer.
:::

:::: {#fs-id1588467 .note}
::: title
:::

How To

*Given a trigonometric equation, solve using algebra*.

Look for a pattern that suggests an algebraic property, such as the
difference of squares or a factoring opportunity.

Substitute the trigonometric expression with a single variable, such as

x

or

u

.

Solve the equation the same way an algebraic equation would be solved.

Substitute the trigonometric expression back in for the variable in the
resulting expressions.

Solve for the angle.
::::

::: {#Example_07_05_03 .example}
Solve the equation exactly: 2cosθ−3=−5,0≤θ\<2π.

Use algebraic techniques to solve the equation.

$$\begin{array}{rcl}
{2\;\cos\;\theta - 3} & = & {- 5} \\
{2\;\cos\;\theta} & = & {- 2} \\
{\cos\;\theta} & = & {- 1} \\
\theta & = & \pi
\end{array}$$
:::

:::: {#fs-id1332935 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Solve exactly the following linear equation on the interval
\[0,2π):2sinx+1=0.

x= 7π 6 , 11π 6
::::

# Solving Equations Involving a Single Trigonometric Function {#fs-id2257766}

When we are given equations that involve only one of the six
trigonometric functions, their solutions involve using algebraic
techniques and the unit circle (see [\#](#)). We need to make several
considerations when the equation involves trigonometric functions other
than sine and cosine. Problems involving the reciprocals of the primary
trigonometric functions need to be viewed from an algebraic perspective.
In other words, we will write the reciprocal function, and solve for the
angles using the function. Also, an equation involving the tangent
function is slightly different from one containing a sine or cosine
function. First, as we know, the period of tangent is π, not 2π.
Further, the domain of tangent is all real numbers with the exception of
odd integer multiples of π 2 , unless, of course, a problem places its
own restrictions on the domain.

::: {#Example_07_05_04 .example}
Solve the problem exactly: 2 sin 2 θ−1=0,0≤θ\<2π.

As this problem is not easily factored, we will solve using the square
root property. First, we use algebra to isolate sinθ. Then we will find
the angles.

$$\begin{array}{rcl}
{2\;\sin^{2}\theta - 1} & = & 0 \\
{\ 2\;\sin^{2}\theta} & = & 1 \\
{\sin^{2}\theta} & = & \frac{1}{2} \\
\sqrt{\sin^{2}\theta} & = & {\pm \sqrt{\frac{1}{2}}} \\
{\sin\;\theta} & = & {\pm \frac{1}{\sqrt{2}} = \pm \frac{\sqrt{2}}{2}} \\
\theta & = & {\frac{\pi}{4},\frac{3\pi}{4},\frac{5\pi}{4},\frac{7\pi}{4}}
\end{array}$$
:::

::: {#Example_07_05_05 .example}
Solve the following equation exactly: cscθ=−2,0≤θ\<4π.

We want all values of θ for which cscθ=−2 over the interval 0≤θ\<4π.

$$\begin{array}{rcl}
{\csc\;\theta} & = & {- 2} \\
\frac{1}{\sin\;\theta} & = & {- 2} \\
{\sin\;\theta} & = & {- \frac{1}{2}} \\
\theta & = & {\frac{7\pi}{6},\frac{11\pi}{6},\frac{19\pi}{6},\frac{23\pi}{6}}
\end{array}$$

As sinθ=− 1 2 , notice that all four solutions are in the third and
fourth quadrants.
:::

::: {#Example_07_05_06 .example}
Solve the equation exactly: tan( θ− π 2 )=1,0≤θ\<2π.

Recall that the tangent function has a period of π. On the interval \[
0,π ), and at the angle of π 4 , the tangent has a value of 1. However,
the angle we want is ( θ− π 2 ). Thus, if tan( π 4 )=1, then

$$\begin{array}{rcl}
{\theta - \frac{\pi}{2}} & = & \frac{\pi}{4} \\
\theta & = & {\frac{3\pi}{4} \pm k\pi}
\end{array}$$

Over the interval \[ 0,2π ), we have two solutions:

$$\theta = \frac{3\pi}{4}\text{~~and~}\theta = \frac{3\pi}{4} + \pi = \frac{7\pi}{4}$$
:::

:::: {#fs-id761316 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Find all solutions for tanx= 3 .

π 3 ±πk
::::

::: {#Example_07_05_07 .example}
Identify all exact solutions to the equation 2( tanx+3 )=5+tanx,0≤x\<2π.

We can solve this equation using only algebra. Isolate the expression
tanx on the left side of the equals sign.

$$\begin{array}{rcl}
{2(\tan\; x) + 2(3)} & = & {5 + \tan\; x} \\
{2\tan\; x + 6} & = & {5 + \tan\; x} \\
{\ 2\tan\; x - \tan\; x} & = & {5 - 6} \\
{\tan\; x} & = & {- 1}
\end{array}$$

There are two angles on the unit circle that have a tangent value of −1:
θ= 3π 4 and θ= 7π 4 .
:::

# Solve Trigonometric Equations Using a Calculator {#fs-id2352803}

Not all functions can be solved exactly using only the unit circle. When
we must solve an equation involving an angle other than one of the
special angles, we will need to use a calculator. Make sure it is set to
the proper mode, either degrees or radians, depending on the criteria of
the given problem.

::: {#Example_07_05_08 .example}
Use a calculator to solve the equation sinθ=0.8, where θ is in radians.

Make sure mode is set to radians. To find θ, use the inverse sine
function. On most calculators, you will need to push the 2ND button and
then the SIN button to bring up the sin −1 function. What is shown on
the screen is sin −1 (. The calculator is ready for the input within the
parentheses. For this problem, we enter sin −1 ( 0.8 ), and press ENTER.
Thus, to four decimals places,

$$\sin^{- 1}(0.8) \approx 0.9273$$

The solution is

$$\theta \approx 0.9273 \pm 2\pi k$$

The angle measurement in degrees is

$$\begin{array}{ccl}
\theta & \approx & 53.1{^\circ} \\
\theta & \approx & {180{^\circ} - 53.1{^\circ}} \\
 & \approx & 126.9{^\circ}
\end{array}$$

Note that a calculator will only return an angle in quadrants I or IV
for the sine function, since that is the range of the inverse sine. The
other angle is obtained by using π−θ. Thus, the additional solution is
≈2.2143±2πk
:::

::: {#Example_07_05_09 .example}
Use a calculator to solve the equation secθ=−4, giving your answer in
radians.

We can begin with some algebra.

$$\begin{array}{rcl}
{\sec\;\theta} & = & {- 4} \\
\frac{1}{\cos\;\theta} & = & {- 4} \\
{\cos\;\theta} & = & {- \frac{1}{4}}
\end{array}$$

Check that the MODE is in radians. Now use the inverse cosine function.

$$\begin{array}{rcl}
{\cos^{- 1}\left( {- \frac{1}{4}} \right)} & \approx & 1.8235 \\
\theta & \approx & {1.8235 + 2\pi k}
\end{array}$$

Since π 2 ≈1.57 and π≈3.14, 1.8235 is between these two numbers, thus
θ≈1.8235 is in quadrant II. Cosine is also negative in quadrant III.
Note that a calculator will only return an angle in quadrants I or II
for the cosine function, since that is the range of the inverse cosine.
See [\#](#).

<figure id="Figure_07_05_005">

</figure>

So, we also need to find the measure of the angle in quadrant III. In
quadrant II, the reference angle is θ ​​\'≈π−1.8235≈1.3181. The other
solution in quadrant III is θ ​​\'≈π+1.3181≈4.4597.

The solutions are θ≈1.8235±2πk and θ≈4.4597±2πk.
:::

:::: {#fs-id2168685 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Solve cosθ=−0.2.

θ≈1.7722±2πk and θ≈4.5110±2πk
::::

# Solving Trigonometric Equations in Quadratic Form {#fs-id2461424}

Solving a quadratic equation may be more complicated, but once again, we
can use algebra as we would for any quadratic equation. Look at the
pattern of the equation. Is there more than one trigonometric function
in the equation, or is there only one? Which trigonometric function is
squared? If there is only one function represented and one of the terms
is squared, think about the standard form of a quadratic. Replace the
trigonometric function with a variable such as x or u. If substitution
makes the equation look like a quadratic equation, then we can use the
same methods for solving quadratics to solve the trigonometric
equations.

::: {#Example_07_05_10 .example}
Solve the equation exactly: cos 2 θ+3cosθ−1=0,0≤θ\<2π.

We begin by using substitution and replacing cos θ with x. It is not
necessary to use substitution, but it may make the problem easier to
solve visually. Let cosθ=x. We have

$$x^{2} + 3x - 1 = 0$$

The equation cannot be factored, so we will use the quadratic formula x=
−b± b 2 −4ac 2a .

$$\begin{array}{ccl}
x & = & \frac{- 3 \pm \sqrt{{( - 3)}^{2} - 4(1)( - 1)}}{2} \\
 & = & \frac{- 3 \pm \sqrt{13}}{2}
\end{array}$$

Replace x with cosθ, and solve.

$$\begin{array}{rcl}
{\cos\;\theta} & = & \frac{- 3 \pm \sqrt{13}}{2} \\
\theta & = & {\cos^{- 1}\left( \frac{- 3 + \sqrt{13}}{2} \right)}
\end{array}$$

Note that only the + sign is used. This is because we get an error when
we solve θ= cos −1 ( −3− 13 2 ) on a calculator, since the domain of the
inverse cosine function is \[ −1,1 \]. However, there is a second
solution:

$$\begin{array}{ccl}
\theta & = & {\cos^{- 1}\left( \frac{- 3 + \sqrt{13}}{2} \right)} \\
 & \approx & 1.26
\end{array}$$

This terminal side of the angle lies in quadrant I. Since cosine is also
positive in quadrant IV, the second solution is

$$\begin{array}{ccl}
\theta & = & {2\pi - \cos^{- 1}\left( \frac{- 3 + \sqrt{13}}{2} \right)} \\
 & \approx & {\ 5.02}
\end{array}$$
:::

::: {#Example_07_05_11 .example}
Solve the equation exactly: 2 sin 2 θ−5sinθ+3=0,0≤θ≤2π.

Using grouping, this quadratic can be factored. Either make the real
substitution, sinθ=u, or imagine it, as we factor:

$$\begin{matrix}
{\ 2\;\sin^{2}\theta - 5\;\sin\;\theta + 3} & = & 0 \\
{(2\;\sin\;\theta - 3)(\sin\;\theta - 1)} & = & 0
\end{matrix}$$

Now set each factor equal to zero.

$$\begin{matrix}
{2\;\sin\;\theta - 3} & = & 0 \\
{2\;\sin\;\theta} & = & 3 \\
{\sin\;\theta} & = & \frac{3}{2} \\
 & & \\
 & & \\
{\sin\;\theta - 1} & = & 0 \\
{\sin\;\theta} & = & 1
\end{matrix}$$

Next solve for θ:sinθ≠ 3 2 , as the range of the sine function is \[
−1,1 \]. However, sinθ=1, giving the solution θ= π 2 .

Make sure to check all solutions on the given domain as some factors
have no solution.
:::

:::: {#fs-id1094265 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Solve sin 2 θ=2cosθ+2,0≤θ≤2π. \[Hint: Make a substitution to express the
equation only in terms of cosine.\]

cosθ=−1,θ=π
::::

::: {#Example_07_05_12 .example}
Solve exactly:

$$2\;\sin^{2}\theta + \sin\;\theta = 0;0 \leq \theta < 2\pi$$

This problem should appear familiar as it is similar to a quadratic. Let
sinθ=x. The equation becomes 2 x 2 +x=0. We begin by factoring:

$$\begin{array}{rcl}
{2x^{2} + x} & = & 0 \\
{x(2x + 1)} & = & 0
\end{array}$$

Set each factor equal to zero.

$$\begin{array}{rcl}
x & = & 0 \\
{(2x + 1)} & = & 0 \\
x & = & {- \frac{1}{2}}
\end{array}$$

Then, substitute back into the equation the original expression sinθ for
x. Thus,

$$\begin{array}{rcl}
{\sin\;\theta} & = & 0 \\
\theta & = & {0,\pi} \\
{\sin\;\theta} & = & {- \frac{1}{2}} \\
\theta & = & {\frac{7\pi}{6},\frac{11\pi}{6}}
\end{array}$$

The solutions within the domain 0≤θ\<2π are θ=0,π, 7π 6 , 11π 6 .

If we prefer not to substitute, we can solve the equation by following
the same pattern of factoring and setting each factor equal to zero.

$$\begin{matrix}
{2\;\sin^{2}\theta + \sin\;\theta} & = & 0 \\
{\sin\;\theta(2\sin\;\theta + 1)} & = & 0 \\
{\sin\;\theta} & = & 0 \\
\theta & = & {0,\pi} \\
 & & \\
{2\;\sin\;\theta + 1} & = & 0 \\
{2\sin\;\theta} & = & {- 1} \\
{\sin\;\theta} & = & {- \frac{1}{2}} \\
\theta & = & {\frac{7\pi}{6},\frac{11\pi}{6}}
\end{matrix}$$

We can see the solutions on the graph in [\#](#). On the interval
0≤θ\<2π, the graph crosses the *x-*axis four times, at the solutions
noted. Notice that trigonometric equations that are in quadratic form
can yield up to four solutions instead of the expected two that are
found with quadratic equations. In this example, each solution (angle)
corresponding to a positive sine value will yield two angles that would
result in that value.

<figure id="Figure_07_05_004">

</figure>

We can verify the solutions on the unit circle in [\#](#) as well.
:::

::: {#Example_07_05_13 .example}
Solve the equation quadratic in form exactly: 2 sin 2
θ−3sinθ+1=0,0≤θ\<2π.

We can factor using grouping. Solution values of θ can be found on the
unit circle.

$$\begin{matrix}
{(2\;\sin\;\theta - 1)(\sin\;\theta - 1)} & = & 0 \\
{\ 2\;\sin\;\theta - 1} & = & 0 \\
{\sin\;\theta} & = & \frac{1}{2} \\
\theta & = & {\frac{\pi}{6},\frac{5\pi}{6}} \\
 & & \\
{\sin\;\theta} & = & 1 \\
\theta & = & \frac{\pi}{2}
\end{matrix}$$
:::

:::: {#fs-id1892509 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Solve the quadratic equation 2 cos 2 θ+cosθ=0.

π 2 , 2π 3 , 4π 3 , 3π 2
::::

# Solving Trigonometric Equations Using Fundamental Identities {#fs-id1597424}

While algebra can be used to solve a number of trigonometric equations,
we can also use the fundamental identities because they make solving
equations simpler. Remember that the techniques we use for solving are
not the same as those for verifying identities. The basic rules of
algebra apply here, as opposed to rewriting one side of the identity to
match the other side. In the next example, we use two identities to
simplify the equation.

::: {#Example_07_05_14 .example}
Use identities to solve exactly the trigonometric equation over the
interval 0≤x\<2π.

$$\cos\; x\;\cos(2x) + \sin\; x\;\sin(2x) = \frac{\sqrt{3}}{2}$$

Notice that the left side of the equation is the difference formula for
cosine.

$$\begin{array}{rclc}
{\cos\; x\;\cos(2x) + \sin\; x\;\sin(2x)} & = & \frac{\sqrt{3}}{2} & \\
{\cos(x - 2x)} & = & \frac{\sqrt{3}}{2} & {\qquad\text{Difference~formula~for~cosine}} \\
{\cos( - x)} & = & \frac{\sqrt{3}}{2} & {\qquad\text{Use~the~negative~angle~identity}.} \\
{\cos\; x} & = & \frac{\sqrt{3}}{2} & 
\end{array}$$

From the unit circle in [\#](#), we see that cosx= 3 2 when x= π 6 , 11π
6 .
:::

::: {#Example_07_05_15 .example}
Solve the equation exactly using a double-angle formula: cos( 2θ )=cosθ.

We have three choices of expressions to substitute for the double-angle
of cosine. As it is simpler to solve for one trigonometric function at a
time, we will choose the double-angle identity involving only cosine:

$$\begin{matrix}
{\cos(2\theta)} & = & {\cos\;\theta} \\
{2\cos^{2}\theta - 1} & = & {\cos\;\theta} \\
{2\;\cos^{2}\theta - \cos\;\theta - 1} & = & 0 \\
{(2\;\cos\;\theta + 1)(\cos\;\theta - 1)} & = & 0 \\
{2\;\cos\;\theta + 1} & = & 0 \\
{\cos\;\theta} & = & {- \frac{1}{2}} \\
 & & \\
{\cos\;\theta - 1} & = & 0 \\
{\cos\;\theta} & = & 1
\end{matrix}$$

So, if cosθ=− 1 2 , then θ= 2π 3 ±2πk and θ= 4π 3 ±2πk; if cosθ=1, then
θ=0±2πk.
:::

::: {#Example_07_05_16 .example}
Solve the equation exactly using an identity: 3cosθ+3=2 sin 2 θ,0≤θ\<2π.

If we rewrite the right side, we can write the equation in terms of
cosine:

$$\begin{array}{rcl}
{3\;\cos\;\theta + 3} & = & {2\sin^{2}\theta} \\
{3\;\cos\;\theta + 3} & = & {2\left( 1 - \cos^{2}\theta \right)} \\
{3\;\cos\;\theta + 3} & = & {2 - 2\cos^{2}\theta} \\
{2\;\cos^{2}\theta + 3\;\cos\;\theta + 1} & = & 0 \\
{(2\;\cos\;\theta + 1)(\cos\;\theta + 1)} & = & 0 \\
{2\;\cos\;\theta + 1} & = & 0 \\
{\cos\;\theta} & = & {- \frac{1}{2}} \\
\theta & = & {\frac{2\pi}{3},\frac{4\pi}{3}} \\
{\cos\;\theta + 1} & = & 0 \\
{\cos\;\theta} & = & {- 1} \\
\theta & = & \pi
\end{array}$$

Our solutions are θ= 2π 3 , 4π 3 ,π.
:::

# Solving Trigonometric Equations with Multiple Angles {#fs-id1518803}

Sometimes it is not possible to solve a trigonometric equation with
identities that have a multiple angle, such as sin( 2x ) or cos( 3x ).
When confronted with these equations, recall that y=sin( 2x ) is a
horizontal compression by a factor of 2 of the function y=sinx. On an
interval of 2π, we can graph two periods of y=sin( 2x ), as opposed to
one cycle of y=sinx. This compression of the graph leads us to believe
there may be twice as many *x*-intercepts or solutions to sin( 2x )=0
compared to sinx=0. This information will help us solve the equation.

::: {#Example_07_05_17 .example}
Solve exactly: cos( 2x )= 1 2 on \[ 0,2π ).

We can see that this equation is the standard equation with a multiple
of an angle. If cos( α )= 1 2 , we know α is in quadrants I and IV.
While θ= cos −1 1 2 will only yield solutions in quadrants I and II, we
recognize that the solutions to the equation cosθ= 1 2 will be in
quadrants I and IV.

Therefore, the possible angles are θ= π 3 and θ= 5π 3 . So, 2x= π 3 or
2x= 5π 3 , which means that x= π 6 or x= 5π 6 . Does this make sense?
Yes, because cos( 2( π 6 ) )=cos( π 3 )= 1 2 .

Are there any other possible answers? Let us return to our first step.

In quadrant I, 2x= π 3 , so x= π 6 as noted. Let us revolve around the
circle again:

$$\begin{array}{ccl}
{2x} & = & {\frac{\pi}{3} + 2\pi} \\
 & = & {\frac{\pi}{3} + \frac{6\pi}{3}} \\
 & = & \frac{7\pi}{3}
\end{array}$$

so x= 7π 6 .

One more rotation yields

$$\begin{array}{ccl}
{2x} & = & {\frac{\pi}{3} + 4\pi} \\
 & = & {\frac{\pi}{3} + \frac{12\pi}{3}} \\
 & = & \frac{13\pi}{3}
\end{array}$$

x= 13π 6 \>2π, so this value for x is larger than 2π, so it is not a
solution on \[ 0,2π ).

In quadrant IV, 2x= 5π 3 , so x= 5π 6 as noted. Let us revolve around
the circle again:

$$\begin{array}{ccl}
{2x} & = & {\frac{5\pi}{3} + 2\pi} \\
 & = & {\frac{5\pi}{3} + \frac{6\pi}{3}} \\
 & = & \frac{11\pi}{3}
\end{array}$$

so x= 11π 6 .

One more rotation yields

$$\begin{array}{ccl}
{2x} & = & {\frac{5\pi}{3} + 4\pi} \\
 & = & {\frac{5\pi}{3} + \frac{12\pi}{3}} \\
 & = & \frac{17\pi}{3}
\end{array}$$

x= 17π 6 \>2π, so this value for x is larger than 2π, so it is not a
solution on \[ 0,2π ).

Our solutions are x= π 6 , 5π 6 , 7π 6 ,and  11π 6 . Note that whenever
we solve a problem in the form of sin( nx )=c, we must go around the
unit circle n times.
:::

# Solving Right Triangle Problems {#fs-id1401253}

We can now use all of the methods we have learned to solve problems that
involve applying the properties of right triangles and the Pythagorean
Theorem. We begin with the familiar Pythagorean Theorem, a 2 + b 2 = c 2
, and model an equation to fit a situation.

::: {#Example_07_05_18 .example}
Use the Pythagorean Theorem, and the properties of right triangles to
model an equation that fits the problem.

One of the cables that anchors the center of the London Eye Ferris wheel
to the ground must be replaced. The center of the Ferris wheel is 69.5
meters above the ground, and the second anchor on the ground is 23
meters from the base of the Ferris wheel. Approximately how long is the
cable, and what is the angle of elevation (from ground up to the center
of the Ferris wheel)? See [\#](#).

<figure id="Figure_07_05_002">

</figure>

Using the information given, we can draw a right triangle. We can find
the length of the cable with the Pythagorean Theorem.

$$\begin{array}{rcl}
{a^{2} + b^{2}} & = & c^{2} \\
{{(23)}^{2} + {(69.5)}^{2}} & \approx & 5359 \\
\sqrt{5359} & \approx & {73.2\text{~m}}
\end{array}$$

The angle of elevation is θ, formed by the second anchor on the ground
and the cable reaching to the center of the wheel. We can use the
tangent function to find its measure. Round to two decimal places.

$$\begin{matrix}
{\tan\;\theta} & = & \frac{69.5}{23} \\
 & & \\
 & & \\
{\tan^{-1}\left( \frac{69.5}{23} \right)} & \approx & 1.2522 \\
 & \approx & {71.69{^\circ}\operatorname{}}
\end{matrix}$$

The angle of elevation is approximately 71.7°, and the length of the
cable is 73.2 meters.
:::

::: {#Example_07_05_19 .example}
OSHA safety regulations require that the base of a ladder be placed 1
foot from the wall for every 4 feet of ladder length. Find the angle
that a ladder of any length forms with the ground and the height at
which the ladder touches the wall.

For any length of ladder, the base needs to be a distance from the wall
equal to one fourth of the ladder's length. Equivalently, if the base of
the ladder is "*a"* feet from the wall, the length of the ladder will be
4*a* feet. See [\#](#).

<figure id="Figure_07_05_003">

</figure>

The side adjacent to θ is *a* and the hypotenuse is 4a. Thus,

$$\begin{array}{rcl}
{\cos\;\theta} & = & {\frac{a}{4a} = \frac{1}{4}} \\
{\cos^{-1}\left( \frac{1}{4} \right)} & \approx & 75.5{^\circ}
\end{array}$$

The elevation of the ladder forms an angle of 75.5° with the ground. The
height at which the ladder touches the wall can be found using the
Pythagorean Theorem:

$$\begin{array}{rcl}
{a^{2} + b^{2}} & = & {(4a)}^{2} \\
b^{2} & = & {{(4a)}^{2} - a^{2}} \\
b^{2} & = & {16a^{2} - a^{2}} \\
b^{2} & = & {15a^{2}} \\
b & = & {a\sqrt{15}}
\end{array}$$

Thus, the ladder touches the wall at a 15 feet from the ground.
:::

:::: {#fs-id2267036 .note}
::: title
:::

Media

Access these online resources for additional instruction and practice
with solving trigonometric equations.

Solving Trigonometric Equations I

Solving Trigonometric Equations II

Solving Trigonometric Equations III

Solving Trigonometric Equations IV

Solving Trigonometric Equations V

Solving Trigonometric Equations VI
::::

# Key Concepts {#fs-id2267085}

When solving linear trigonometric equations, we can use algebraic
techniques just as we do solving algebraic equations. Look for patterns,
like the difference of squares, quadratic form, or an expression that
lends itself well to substitution. See

,

, and

.

Equations involving a single trigonometric function can be solved or
verified using the unit circle. See

,

, and

, and

.

We can also solve trigonometric equations using a graphing calculator.
See

and

.

Many equations appear quadratic in form. We can use substitution to make
the equation appear simpler, and then use the same techniques we use
solving an algebraic quadratic: factoring, the quadratic formula, etc.
See

,

,

, and

.

We can also use the identities to solve trigonometric equation. See

,

, and

.

We can use substitution to solve a multiple-angle trigonometric
equation, which is a compression of a standard trigonometric function.
We will need to take the compression into account and verify that we
have found all solutions on the given interval. See

.

Real-world scenarios can be modeled and solved using the Pythagorean
Theorem and trigonometric functions. See

.

# Section Exercises {#fs-id1869641}

## Verbal {#fs-id1869645}

Will there always be solutions to trigonometric function equations? If
not, describe an equation that would not have a solution. Explain why or
why not.

There will not always be solutions to trigonometric function equations.
For a basic example, cos(x)=−5.

When solving a trigonometric equation involving more than one trig
function, do we always want to try to rewrite the equation so it is
expressed in terms of one trigonometric function? Why or why not?

When solving linear trig equations in terms of only sine or cosine, how
do we know whether there will be solutions?

If the sine or cosine function has a coefficient of one, isolate the
term on one side of the equals sign. If the number it is set equal to
has an absolute value less than or equal to one, the equation has
solutions, otherwise it does not. If the sine or cosine does not have a
coefficient equal to one, still isolate the term but then divide both
sides of the equation by the leading coefficient. Then, if the number it
is set equal to has an absolute value greater than one, the equation has
no solution.

## Algebraic {#fs-id2189057}

For the following exercises, find all solutions exactly on the interval
0≤θ\<2π.

2sinθ=− 2

2sinθ= 3

π 3 , 2π 3

2cosθ=1

2cosθ=− 2

3π 4 , 5π 4

tanθ=−1

tanx=1

π 4 , 5π 4

cotx+1=0

4 sin 2 x−2=0

π 4 , 3π 4 , 5π 4 , 7π 4

csc 2 x−4=0

For the following exercises, solve exactly on \[0,2π).

2cosθ= 2

π 4 , 7π 4

2cosθ=−1

2sinθ=−1

7π 6 , 11π 6

2sinθ=− 3

2sin( 3θ )=1

π 18 , 5π 18 , 13π 18 , 17π 18 , 25π 18 , 29π 18

2sin( 2θ )= 3

2cos( 3θ )=− 2

3π 12 , 5π 12 , 11π 12 , 13π 12 , 19π 12 , 21π 12

cos( 2θ )=− 3 2

2sin( πθ )=1

1 6 , 5 6 , 13 6 , 17 6 , 25 6 , 29 6 , 37 6

2cos( π 5 θ )= 3

For the following exercises, find all exact solutions on \[ 0,2π ).

sec(x)sin(x)−2sin(x)=0

0, π 3 ,π, 5π 3

tan(x)−2sin(x)tan(x)=0

2 cos 2 t+cos( t )=1

π 3 ,π, 5π 3

2 tan 2 (t)=3sec(t)

2sin(x)cos(x)−sin(x)+2cos(x)−1=0

π 3 , 3π 2 , 5π 3

cos 2 θ= 1 2

sec 2 x=1

0,π

tan 2 ( x )=−1+2tan( −x )

8 sin 2 (x)+6sin(x)+1=0

π− sin −1 ( − 1 4 ), 7π 6 , 11π 6 ,2π+ sin −1 ( − 1 4 )

tan 5 (x)=tan(x)

For the following exercises, solve with the methods shown in this
section exactly on the interval \[0,2π).

sin(3x)cos(6x)−cos(3x)sin(6x)=−0.9

1 3 ( sin −1 ( 9 10 ) ), π 3 − 1 3 ( sin −1 ( 9 10 ) ), 2π 3 + 1 3 ( sin
−1 ( 9 10 ) ), π− 1 3 ( sin −1 ( 9 10 ) ), 4π 3 + 1 3 ( sin −1 ( 9 10 )
), 5π 3 − 1 3 ( sin −1 ( 9 10 ) )

sin(6x)cos(11x)−cos(6x)sin(11x)=−0.1

cos( 2x )cosx+sin( 2x )sinx=1

0

6sin( 2t )+9sint=0

9cos( 2θ )=9 cos 2 θ−4

π 6 , 5π 6 , 7π 6 , 11π 6

sin( 2t )=cost

cos( 2t )=sint

3π 2 , π 6 , 5π 6

cos(6x)−cos(3x)=0

For the following exercises, solve exactly on the interval \[ 0,2π ).
Use the quadratic formula if the equations do not factor.

tan 2 x− 3 tanx=0

0, π 3 ,π, 4π 3

sin 2 x+sinx−2=0

sin 2 x−2sinx−4=0

There are no solutions.

5 cos 2 x+3cosx−1=0

3 cos 2 x−2cosx−2=0

cos −1 ( 1 3 ( 1− 7 ) ), 2π− cos −1 ( 1 3 ( 1− 7 ) )

5 sin 2 x+2sinx−1=0

tan 2 x+5tanx−1=0

tan −1 ( 1 2 ( 29 −5 ) ), π+ tan −1 ( 1 2 ( − 29 −5 ) ), π+ tan −1 ( 1 2
( 29 −5 ) ), 2π+ tan −1 ( 1 2 ( − 29 −5 ) )

cot 2 x=−cotx

− tan 2 x−tanx−2=0

There are no solutions.

For the following exercises, find exact solutions on the interval
\[0,2π). Look for opportunities to use trigonometric identities.

sin 2 x− cos 2 x−sinx=0

sin 2 x+ cos 2 x=0

There are no solutions.

sin( 2x )−sinx=0

cos( 2x )−cosx=0

0, 2π 3 , 4π 3

2tanx 2− sec 2 x − sin 2 x= cos 2 x

1−cos(2x)=1+cos(2x)

π 4 , 3π 4 , 5π 4 , 7π 4

sec 2 x=7

10sinxcosx=6cosx

sin −1 ( 3 5 ), π 2 ,π− sin −1 ( 3 5 ), 3π 2

−3sint=15costsint

4 cos 2 x−4=15cosx

cos −1 ( − 1 4 ),2π− cos −1 ( − 1 4 )

8 sin 2 x+6sinx+1=0

8 cos 2 θ=3−2cosθ

π 3 , cos −1 ( − 3 4 ), 2π− cos −1 ( − 3 4 ), 5π 3

6 cos 2 x+7sinx−8=0

12 sin 2 t+cost−6=0

cos −1 ( 3 4 ), cos −1 ( − 2 3 ), 2π− cos −1 ( − 2 3 ), 2π− cos −1 ( 3 4
)

tanx=3sinx

cos 3 t=cost

0, π 2 ,π, 3π 2

## Graphical {#fs-id2575181}

For the following exercises, algebraically determine all solutions of
the trigonometric equation exactly, then verify the results by graphing
the equation and finding the zeros. Use an interval of \[0,2π)

6 sin 2 x−5sinx+1=0

8 cos 2 x−2cosx−1=0

π 3 , cos −1 ( − 1 4 ), 2π− cos −1 ( − 1 4 ), 5π 3

100 tan 2 x+20tanx−3=0

2 cos 2 x−cosx+15=0

There are no solutions.

20 sin 2 x−27sinx+7=0

2 tan 2 x+7tanx+6=0

π+ tan −1 ( −2 ), π+ tan −1 ( − 3 2 ), 2π+ tan −1 ( −2 ), 2π+ tan −1 ( −
3 2 )

130 tan 2 x+69tanx−130=0

## Technology {#fs-id1728260}

For the following exercises, use a calculator to find all solutions to
four decimal places.

sinx=0.27

2πk+0.2734,2πk+2.8682

sinx=−0.55

tanx=−0.34

πk−0.3277

cosx=0.71

For the following exercises, solve the equations algebraically, and then
use a calculator to find the values on the interval \[0,2π). Round to
four decimal places.

tan 2 x+3tanx−3=0

0.6694,1.8287,3.8110,4.9703

6 tan 2 x+13tanx=−6

tan 2 x−secx=1

1.0472,3.1416,5.2360

sin 2 x−2 cos 2 x=0

2 tan 2 x+9tanx−6=0

0.5326,1.7648,3.6742,4.9064

4 sin 2 x+sin( 2x )secx−3=0

## Extensions {#fs-id2763967}

For the following exercises, find all solutions exactly to the equations
on the interval \[0,2π).

csc 2 x−3cscx−4=0

sin −1 ( 1 4 ),π− sin −1 ( 1 4 ), 3π 2

sin 2 x− cos 2 x−1=0

sin 2 x( 1− sin 2 x )+ cos 2 x( 1− sin 2 x )=0

π 2 , 3π 2

3 sec 2 x+2+ sin 2 x− tan 2 x+ cos 2 x=0

sin 2 x−1+2cos( 2x )− cos 2 x=1

There are no solutions.

tan 2 x−1− sec 3 xcosx=0

sin( 2x ) sec 2 x =0

0, π 2 ,π, 3π 2

sin( 2x ) 2 csc 2 x =0

2 cos 2 x− sin 2 x−cosx−5=0

There are no solutions.

1 sec 2 x +2+ sin 2 x+4 cos 2 x=4

## Real-World Applications {#fs-id2796297}

An airplane has only enough gas to fly to a city 200 miles northeast of
its current location. If the pilot knows that the city is 25 miles
north, how many degrees north of east should the airplane fly?

7.2 ∘

If a loading ramp is placed next to a truck, at a height of 4 feet, and
the ramp is 15 feet long, what angle does the ramp make with the ground?

If a loading ramp is placed next to a truck, at a height of 2 feet, and
the ramp is 20 feet long, what angle does the ramp make with the ground?

5.7 ∘

A woman is watching a launched rocket currently 11 miles in altitude. If
she is standing 4 miles from the launch pad, at what angle is she
looking up from horizontal?

An astronaut is in a launched rocket currently 15 miles in altitude. If
a man is standing 2 miles from the launch pad, at what angle is the
astronaut looking down at him from horizontal? (Hint: this is called the
angle of depression.)

82.4 ∘

A woman is standing 8 meters away from a 10-meter tall building. At what
angle is she looking to the top of the building?

Issa is standing 10 meters away from a 6-meter tall building. Travis is
at the top of the building looking down at Issa. At what angle is Travis
looking at Issa?

31.0 ∘

A 20-foot tall building has a shadow that is 55 feet long. What is the
angle of elevation of the sun?

A 90-foot tall building has a shadow that is 2 feet long. What is the
angle of elevation of the sun?

88.7 ∘

A spotlight on the ground 3 meters from a 2-meter tall man casts a 6
meter shadow on a wall 6 meters from the man. At what angle is the
light?

A spotlight on the ground 3 feet from a 5-foot tall woman casts a
15-foot tall shadow on a wall 6 feet from the woman. At what angle is
the light?

59.0 ∘

For the following exercises, find a solution to the following word
problem algebraically. Then use a calculator to verify the result. Round
the answer to the nearest tenth of a degree.

A person does a handstand with their feet touching a wall and their
hands 1.5 feet away from the wall. If the person is 6 feet tall, what
angle do their feet make with the wall?

A person does a handstand with her feet touching a wall and her hands 3
feet away from the wall. If the person is 5 feet tall, what angle do her
feet make with the wall?

36.9 ∘

A 23-foot ladder is positioned next to a house. If the ladder slips at 7
feet from the house when there is not enough traction, what angle should
the ladder make with the ground to avoid slipping?

# Chapter Review Exercises {#fs-id1817053}

## [Simplifying and Verifying Trigonometric Identities](#) {#fs-id1817056}

For the following exercises, find all solutions exactly that exist on
the interval \[ 0,2π ).

csc 2 t=3

sin −1 ( 3 3 ), π− sin −1 ( 3 3 ), π+ sin −1 ( 3 3 ), 2π− sin −1 ( 3 3 )

cos 2 x= 1 4

2sinθ=−1

7π 6 , 11π 6

tanxsinx+sin( −x )=0

9sinω−2=4 sin 2 ω

sin −1 ( 1 4 ),π− sin −1 ( 1 4 )

1−2tan(ω)= tan 2 (ω)

For the following exercises, use basic identities to simplify the
expression.

secxcosx+cosx− 1 secx

1

sin 3 x+ cos 2 xsinx

For the following exercises, determine if the given identities are
equivalent.

sin 2 x+ sec 2 x−1= ( 1− cos 2 x )( 1+ cos 2 x ) cos 2 x

Yes

tan 3 x csc 2 x cot 2 xcosxsinx=1

## [Sum and Difference Identities](#) {#fs-id1617465}

For the following exercises, find the exact value.

tan( 7π 12 )

−2− 3

cos( 25π 12 )

sin(70°)cos(25°)−cos(70°)sin(25°)

2 2

cos(83°)cos(23°)+sin(83°)sin(23°)

For the following exercises, prove the identity.

cos( 4x )−cos( 3x )cosx= sin 2 x−4 cos 2 x sin 2 x

cos(4x)−cos(3x)cosx = cos(2x+2x)−cos(x+2x)cosx =
cos(2x)cos(2x)−sin(2x)sin(2x)−cosxcos(2x)cosx+sinxsin(2x)cosx = ( cos 2
x− sin 2 x ) 2 −4 cos 2 x sin 2 x− cos 2 x( cos 2 x− sin 2 x
)+sinx(2)sinxcosxcosx = ( cos 2 x− sin 2 x ) 2 −4 cos 2 x sin 2 x− cos 2
x( cos 2 x− sin 2 x )+2 sin 2 x cos 2 x = cos 4 x−2 cos 2 x sin 2 x+ sin
4 x−4 cos 2 x sin 2 x− cos 4 x+ cos 2 x sin 2 x+2 sin 2 x cos 2 x = sin
4 x−4 cos 2 x sin 2 x+ cos 2 x sin 2 x = sin 2 x( sin 2 x+ cos 2 x )−4
cos 2 x sin 2 x = sin 2 x−4 cos 2 x sin 2 x

cos(3x)− cos 3 x=−cosx sin 2 x−sinxsin(2x)

For the following exercise, simplify the expression.

tan( 1 2 x )+tan( 1 8 x ) 1−tan( 1 8 x )tan( 1 2 x )

tan( 5 8 x )

For the following exercises, find the exact value.

cos( sin −1 ( 0 )− cos −1 ( 1 2 ) )

tan( sin −1 ( 0 )+ sin −1 ( 1 2 ) )

3 3

## [Double-Angle, Half-Angle, and Reduction Formulas](#) {#fs-id1995856}

For the following exercises, find the exact value.

Find sin( 2θ ),cos( 2θ ), and tan( 2θ ) given cosθ=− 1 3 and θ is in the
interval \[ π 2 ,π \].

Find sin( 2θ ),cos( 2θ ), and tan( 2θ ) given secθ=− 5 3 and θ is in the
interval \[ π 2 ,π \].

− 24 25 ,− 7 25 , 24 7

sin( 7π 8 )

sec( 3π 8 )

2( 2+ 2 )

For the following exercises, use [\#](#) to find the desired quantities.

<figure id="Figure_07_07_201">

</figure>

sin(2β),cos(2β),tan(2β),sin(2α),cos(2α),and tan(2α)

sin( β 2 ),cos( β 2 ),tan( β 2 ),sin( α 2 ),cos( α 2 ),and tan( α 2 )

2 10 , 7 2 10 , 1 7 , 3 5 , 4 5 , 3 4

For the following exercises, prove the identity.

2cos( 2x ) sin( 2x ) =cotx−tanx

cotxcos(2x)=−sin(2x)+cotx

cotxcos(2x) = cotx( 1−2 sin 2 x ) = cotx− cosx sinx (2) sin 2 x =
−2sinxcosx+cotx = −sin(2x)+cotx

For the following exercises, rewrite the expression with no powers.

cos 2 x sin 4 (2x)

tan 2 x sin 3 x

10sinx−5sin( 3x )+sin( 5x ) 8( cos( 2x )+1 )

## [Sum-to-Product and Product-to-Sum Formulas](#) {#fs-id1760577}

For the following exercises, evaluate the product for the given
expression using a sum or difference of two functions. Write the exact
answer.

cos( π 3 )sin( π 4 )

2sin( 2π 3 )sin( 5π 6 )

3 2

2cos( π 5 )cos( π 3 )

For the following exercises, evaluate the sum by using a product
formula. Write the exact answer.

sin( π 12 )−sin( 7π 12 )

− 2 2

cos( 5π 12 )+cos( 7π 12 )

For the following exercises, change the functions from a product to a
sum or a sum to a product.

sin(9x)cos(3x)

1 2 ( sin(6x)+sin(12x) )

cos(7x)cos(12x)

sin(11x)+sin(2x)

2sin( 13 2 x )cos( 9 2 x )

cos(6x)+cos(5x)

## [Solving Trigonometric Equations](#) {#fs-id2042633}

For the following exercises, find all exact solutions on the interval \[
0,2π ).

tanx+1=0

3π 4 , 7π 4

2sin(2x)+ 2 =0

For the following exercises, find all exact solutions on the interval \[
0,2π ).

2 sin 2 x−sinx=0

0, π 6 , 5π 6 ,π

cos 2 x−cosx−1=0

2 sin 2 x+5sinx+3=0

3π 2

cosx−5sin( 2x )=0

1 sec 2 x +2+ sin 2 x+4 cos 2 x=0

No solution

For the following exercises, simplify the equation algebraically as much
as possible. Then use a calculator to find the solutions on the interval
\[0,2π). Round to four decimal places.

3 cot 2 x+cotx=1

csc 2 x−3cscx−4=0

0.2527,2.8889,4.7124

For the following exercises, graph each side of the equation to find the
approximate solutions on the interval \[0,2π).

20 cos 2 x+21cosx+1=0

sec 2 x−2secx=15

1.3694,1.9106,4.3726,4.9137

# Practice Test {#fs-id1796401}

For the following exercises, simplify the given expression.

cos( −x )sinxcotx+ sin 2 x

1

sin(−x)cos(−2x)−sin(−x)cos(−2x)

csc( θ )cot( θ )( sec 2 θ−1 )

sec( θ )

cos 2 ( θ ) sin 2 ( θ )( 1+ cot 2 ( θ ) )( 1+ tan 2 ( θ ) )

For the following exercises, find the exact value.

cos( 7π 12 )

2 − 6 4

tan( 3π 8 )

tan( sin −1 ( 2 2 )+ tan −1 3 )

− 2 − 3

2sin( π 4 )sin( π 6 )

cos( 4π 3 +θ )

− 1 2 cos θ + 3 2 sin θ

tan( − π 4 +θ )

For the following exercises, simplify each expression. Do not evaluate.

cos 2 (32°) tan 2 (32°)

1−cos( 64 ∘ ) 2

cot( θ 2 )

For the following exercises, find all exact solutions to the equation on
\[0,2π).

cos 2 x− sin 2 x−1=0

0,π

cos 2 x=cosx

cos( 2x )+ sin 2 x=0

π2,3π2

2 sin 2 x−sinx=0

Rewrite the expression as a product instead of a sum: cos( 2x )+cos( −8x
).

2cos(3x)cos(5x)

For the following exercise, rewrite the product as a sum or difference.

8cos( 15x )sin( 3x )

For the following exercise, rewrite the sum or difference as a product.

2( sin( 8θ )−sin( 4θ ) )

4sin( 2θ )cos( 6θ )

Find all solutions of tan(x)− 3 =0.

Find the solutions of sec 2 x−2secx=15 on the interval \[ 0,2π )
algebraically; then graph both sides of the equation to determine the
answer.

x=cos--1 (15)

For the following exercises, find all solutions exactly on the interval
0≤θ≤π

2cos( θ 2 )=1

3 cot( y )=1

π3

Find sin( 2θ ),cos( 2θ ), and tan( 2θ ) given cotθ=− 3 4 and θ is on the
interval \[ π 2 ,π \].

Find sin( θ 2 ),cos( θ 2 ), and tan( θ 2 ) given cosθ= 7 25 and θ is in
quadrant IV.

35 , -- 45 , -- 34

Rewrite the expression sin 4 x with no powers greater than 1.

For the following exercises, prove the identity.

tan 3 x−tanx sec 2 x=tan( −x )

tan3x--tanxsec2x =tanx(tan2x--sec2x) =tanx(tan2x--(1+tan2x))
=tanx(tan2x--1--tan2x) =--tanx=tan(--x)=tan(--x)

sin( 3x )−cosxsin( 2x )= cos 2 xsinx− sin 3 x

sin( 2x ) sinx − cos( 2x ) cosx =secx

sin(2x) sinx-- cos(2x) cosx = 2sinxcosx sinx -- 2cos2x--1cosx =
2cosx--2cosx+1cosx = 1cosx =secx=secx

Plot the points and find a function of the form y=Acos( Bx+C )+D that
fits the given data.

  ------- ---- --- ---- --- ---- ---
  *x*     0    1   2    3   4    5
  *y*     −2   2   −2   2   −2   2
  ------- ---- --- ---- --- ---- ---

The displacement h(t) in centimeters of a mass suspended by a spring is
modeled by the function h(t)= 1 4 sin(120πt), where t is measured in
seconds. Find the amplitude, period, and frequency of this displacement.

Amplitude: 14 , period: 160 , frequency: 60 Hz

A woman is standing 300 feet away from a 2000-foot building. If she
looks to the top of the building, at what angle above horizontal is she
looking? A worker looks down at her from the 15th floor (1500 feet above
her). At what angle is he looking down at her? Round to the nearest
tenth of a degree.

Two frequencies of sound are played on an instrument governed by the
equation n(t)=8cos(20πt)cos(1000πt). What are the period and frequency
of the "fast" and "slow" oscillations? What is the amplitude?

Amplitude: 8, fast period: 1500 , fast frequency: 500 Hz, slow period:
110 , slow frequency: 10 Hz

The average monthly snowfall in a small village in the Himalayas is 6
inches, with the low of 1 inch occurring in July. Construct a function
that models this behavior. During what period is there more than 10
inches of snowfall?

A spring attached to a ceiling is pulled down 20 cm. After 3 seconds,
wherein it completes 6 full periods, the amplitude is only 15 cm. Find
the function modeling the position of the spring t seconds after being
released. At what time will the spring come to rest? In this case, use 1
cm amplitude as rest.

D(t)=20(0.9086)t cos(4πt) , 31 second

Water levels near a glacier currently average 9 feet, varying seasonally
by 2 inches above and below the average and reaching their highest point
in January. Due to global warming, the glacier has begun melting faster
than normal. Every year, the water levels rise by a steady 3 inches.
Find a function modeling the depth of the water t months from now. If
the docks are 2 feet above current water levels, at what point will the
water first rise above the docks?
