m49418

> 

0a0b86df-3166-4f7a-a9b1-c1cbfde99aa9

<figure id="Figure_09_00_001">

</figure>

At the start of the Second World War, British military and intelligence
officers recognized that defeating Nazi Germany would require the Allies
to know what the enemy was planning. This task was complicated by the
fact that the German military transmitted all of its communications
through a presumably uncrackable code created by a machine called
Enigma. The Germans had been encoding their messages with this machine
since the early 1930s, and were so confident in its security that they
used it for everyday military communications as well as highly important
strategic messages. Concerned about the increasing military threat,
other European nations began working to decipher the Enigma codes.
Poland was the first country to make significant advances when it
trained and recruited a new group of codebreakers: math students from
Poznań University. With the help of intelligence obtained by French
spies, Polish mathematicians, led by Marian Rejewski, were able to
decipher initial codes and later to understand the wiring of the
machines; eventually they create replicas. However, the German military
eventually increased the complexity of the machines by adding additional
rotors, requiring a new method of decryption.

The machine attached letters on a keyboard to three, four, or five
rotors (depending on the version), each with 26 starting positions that
could be set prior to encoding; a decryption code (called a cipher key)
essentially conveyed these settings to the message recipient, and
allowed people to interpret the message using another Enigma machine.
Even with the simpler three-rotor scrambler, there were 17,576 different
combinations of starting positions (26 x 26 x 26); plus the machine had
numerous other methods of introducing variation. Not long after the war
started, the British recruited a team of brilliant codebreakers to crack
the Enigma code. The codebreakers, led by Alan Turing, used what they
knew about the Enigma machine to build a mechanical computer that could
crack the code. And that knowledge of what the Germans were planning
proved to be a key part of the ultimate Allied victory of Nazi Germany
in 1945.

The Enigma is perhaps the most famous cryptographic device ever known.
It stands as an example of the pivotal role cryptography has played in
society. Now, technology has moved cryptanalysis to the digital world.

Many ciphers are designed using invertible matrices as the method of
message transference, as finding the inverse of a matrix is generally
part of the process of decoding. In addition to knowing the matrix and
its inverse, the receiver must also know the key that, when used with
the matrix inverse, will allow the message to be read.

In this chapter, we will investigate matrices and their inverses, and
various ways to use matrices to solve systems of equations. First,
however, we will study systems of equations on their own: linear and
nonlinear, and then partial fractions. We will not be breaking any
secret codes here, but we will lay the foundation for future courses.
