m49420

> In this section, you will:
>
> Solve systems of equations by graphing.
>
> Solve systems of equations by substitution.
>
> Solve systems of equations by addition.
>
> Identify inconsistent systems of equations containing two variables.
>
> Express the solution of a system of dependent equations containing two
> variables.

0bb1dacf-671b-4fe5-a5a4-e67ad9a48d54

#  {#eip-897}

## Learning Objectives {#eip-344}

Determine whether an ordered pair is a solution of a system of equations
(IA 4.1.1)

Solve a system of linear equations by graphing (IA 4.1.2)

## Objective: Determine whether an ordered pair is a solution of a system of equations (IA 4.1.1) {#eip-584}

A *system* of linear equations is a group of two or more linear
equations. For example,

$$\left\{ \begin{array}{l}
{y = - 2x + 5} \\
{y = 2x + 7}
\end{array} \right.$$

is a system of linear equations

A *solution* to a system of linear equations is an ordered pair x,y that
is a solution to every equation in the system.

::: {#eip-288 .example}
Determine whether the ordered pairs are solutions to the given system.

2x-6y=03x-y=5 at (3, 1) and (-3, 4)

We substitute (3, 1) into both equations:

+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| 2x-6y=0                          | 3x-4y=5                          |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| 2(3)-6(1)=06-6=00=0 True         | 3(3)-4(1)=59-4=55=5 True         |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| (3,1) is a solution to 2x-6y=0   | (3,1) is a solution to 3x-4y=5   |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Conclusion: since (3,1) is a solution to both equations, then it is |
| a solution to the system 2x-6y=03x-4y=5                             |
+---------------------------------------------------------------------+

Next we substitute (-3, -1) into both equations:

+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| 2x-6y=0                          | 3x-4y=5                          |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| 2(-3)-6(-1)=0-6+6=00=0 True      | 3(-3)-4(-1)=5-9+4=5-5=5 False    |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| (-3,-1) is a solution to 2x-6y=0 | (-3,-1) is *not* a solution to   |
|                                  | 3x-4y=5                          |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Conclusion: Since (-3,-1) is not a solution to one of the           |
| equations, then it is not a solution to the system 2x-6y=03x-4y=5   |
+---------------------------------------------------------------------+
:::

### Practice Makes Perfect {#eip-37}

Determine whether the ordered pairs are solutions to the given system.

3x+y=0x+2y=-5 at (0, 0) and (1, -3)

At (0, 0):

+--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 3x+y=0                                                                                           | x+2y=--5                                                                                         |
+--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ | \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |
+--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ | \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |
+--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Conclusion: \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_                                                                                                                                        |
+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+

At (1, --3)

+--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| 3x+y=0                                                                                           | x+2y=--5                                                                                         |
+--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ | \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |
+--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ | \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |
+--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Conclusion: \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_                                                                                                                                        |
+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+

## Solve a system of linear equations by graphing (IA 4.1.2) {#eip-121}

:::: {#eip-867 .note}
::: title
Solve a system of linear equations by graphing
:::

Graph the first equation.

Graph the second equation on the same rectangular coordinate system.

Determine whether the lines intersect, are parallel, or are the same
line.

Identify the solution to the system.

Check the solution in both equations.

  ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- --
  If the lines intersect, identify the point of intersection. This is the solution to the system.   
  If the lines are parallel, the system has no solutions.                                           
  If the lines are the same, the system has an infinite number of solutions.                        
  ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- --
::::

::: {#eip-385 .example}
Solve the system by graphing.

-x+y=12x+y=10

  -------- -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Step 1   Graph -x+y=1 We can use the slope intercept -- form: y=x+1 Slope = 1 y-intercept: (0, 1)
  Step 2   Graph 2x+y=10 We can use the slope intercept -- form: y=-2x+10 Slope = --2 y-intercept: (0, 10)
  Step 3   The lines intersect
  Step 4   The solution is the point (3, 4)
  Step 5   Let's check the solution: -x+y=12x+y=10-3+4=12(3)+4=101=110=10 Since (3, 4) is a solution to both equations, then it *is a solution* to the system -x+y=1 2x+y=10
  -------- -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
:::

:::: {#eip-520 .note}
::: title
:::

Solve a system of linear equations by graphing y=-2x+44x+2y=6

  -------- -----------------------------------------------------------------------
  Step 1   Graph y=-2x+4 Slope = \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ y-intercept = \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
  Step 2   Graph 4x+2y=6 Slope = \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ y-intercept = \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
  Step 3   Do the lines intersect?\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
  Step 4   Read from the graph the point of intersection.\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
  Step 5   Check the solution in both equations.\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
  -------- -----------------------------------------------------------------------
::::

### Practice Makes Perfect {#eip-147}

Determine whether the ordered pair is a solution to the given system
x-3y=-8-3x-y=4

Solve the following system by graphing. y=-14x+2x+4y=8

<figure id="Figure_09_01_001">

</figure>

A skateboard manufacturer introduces a new line of boards. The
manufacturer tracks its costs, which is the amount it spends to produce
the boards, and its revenue, which is the amount it earns through sales
of its boards. How can the company determine if it is making a profit
with its new line? How many skateboards must be produced and sold before
a profit is possible? In this section, we will consider linear equations
with two variables to answer these and similar questions.

# Introduction to Systems of Equations {#fs-id1165133236395}

In order to investigate situations such as that of the skateboard
manufacturer, we need to recognize that we are dealing with more than
one variable and likely more than one equation. A system of linear
equations consists of two or more linear equations made up of two or
more variables such that all equations in the system are considered
simultaneously. To find the unique solution to a system of linear
equations, we must find a numerical value for each variable in the
system that will satisfy all equations in the system at the same time.
Some linear systems may not have a solution and others may have an
infinite number of solutions. In order for a linear system to have a
unique solution, there must be at least as many equations as there are
variables. Even so, this does not guarantee a unique solution.

In this section, we will look at systems of linear equations in two
variables, which consist of two equations that contain two different
variables. For example, consider the following system of linear
equations in two variables.

$$\begin{matrix}
{2x + y = \mspace{9mu} 15} \\
{3x–y = \mspace{9mu} 5}
\end{matrix}$$

The *solution* to a system of linear equations in two variables is any
ordered pair that satisfies each equation independently. In this
example, the ordered pair (4, 7) is the solution to the system of linear
equations. We can verify the solution by substituting the values into
each equation to see if the ordered pair satisfies both equations.
Shortly we will investigate methods of finding such a solution if it
exists.

$$\begin{array}{l}
{2(4) + (7) = 15\mspace{9mu}\text{True}} \\
{3(4) - (7) = 5\mspace{9mu}\text{True}}
\end{array}$$

In addition to considering the number of equations and variables, we can
categorize systems of linear equations by the number of solutions. A
consistent system of equations has at least one solution. A consistent
system is considered to be an *independent system* if it has a single
solution, such as the example we just explored. The two lines have
different slopes and intersect at one point in the plane. A consistent
system is considered to be a *dependent system* if the equations have
the same slope and the same *y*-intercepts. In other words, the lines
coincide so the equations represent the same line. Every point on the
line represents a coordinate pair that satisfies the system. Thus, there
are an infinite number of solutions.

Another type of system of linear equations is an *inconsistent system*,
which is one in which the equations represent two parallel lines. The
lines have the same slope and different *y-*intercepts. There are no
points common to both lines; hence, there is no solution to the system.

:::: {#fs-id1165137642700 .note}
::: title
Types of Linear Systems
:::

There are three types of systems of linear equations in two variables,
and three types of solutions. An independent system has exactly one
solution pair ( x,y ). The point where the two lines intersect is the
only solution. An inconsistent system has no solution. Notice that the
two lines are parallel and will never intersect. A dependent system has
infinitely many solutions. The lines are coincident. They are the same
line, so every coordinate pair on the line is a solution to both
equations.

[\#](#) compares graphical representations of each type of system.

<figure id="Figure_09_01_002">

</figure>
::::

:::: {#fs-id1165137838246 .note}
::: title
:::

How To

*Given a system of linear equations and an ordered pair, determine
whether the ordered pair is a solution.*

Substitute the ordered pair into each equation in the system.

Determine whether true statements result from the substitution in both
equations; if so, the ordered pair is a solution.
::::

::: {#Example_09_01_01 .example}
Determine whether the ordered pair ( 5,1 ) is a solution to the given
system of equations.

$$\begin{array}{l}
{\mspace{9mu} x + 3y = 8} \\
{\mspace{9mu} 2x - 9 = y}
\end{array}$$

Substitute the ordered pair ( 5,1 ) into both equations.

$$\begin{array}{ll}
{(5) + 3(1) = 8} & \\
{8 = 8} & \text{True} \\
{2(5) - 9 = (1)} & \\
\text{1=1} & \text{True}
\end{array}$$

The ordered pair ( 5,1 ) satisfies both equations, so it is the solution
to the system.

We can see the solution clearly by plotting the graph of each equation.
Since the solution is an ordered pair that satisfies both equations, it
is a point on both of the lines and thus the point of intersection of
the two lines. See [\#](#).

<figure id="Figure_09_01_003">

</figure>
:::

:::: {#fs-id1165137758492 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Determine whether the ordered pair ( 8,5 ) is a solution to the
following system.

$$\begin{matrix}
{5x-4y = 20} \\
{2x + 1 = 3y}
\end{matrix}$$

Not a solution.
::::

# Solving Systems of Equations by Graphing {#fs-id1165134573832}

There are multiple methods of solving systems of linear equations. For a
system of linear equations in two variables, we can determine both the
type of system and the solution by graphing the system of equations on
the same set of axes.

::: {#Example_09_01_02 .example}
Solve the following system of equations by graphing. Identify the type
of system.

$$\begin{matrix}
{2x + y = -8} \\
{x - y = -1}
\end{matrix}$$

Solve the first equation for y.

$$\begin{matrix}
{2x + y = -8} \\
{y = -2x-8}
\end{matrix}$$

Solve the second equation for y.

$$\begin{matrix}
{x - y = -1} \\
{y = x + 1}
\end{matrix}$$

Graph both equations on the same set of axes as in [\#](#).

<figure id="Figure_09_01_012">

</figure>

The lines appear to intersect at the point ( −3,−2 ). We can check to
make sure that this is the solution to the system by substituting the
ordered pair into both equations.

$$\begin{array}{ll}
{2(-3) + (-2) = -8} & \\
{\mspace{9mu}-8 = -8} & \text{True} \\
{\mspace{9mu}(-3) - (-2) = -1} & \\
{\mspace{9mu}-1 = -1} & \text{True}
\end{array}$$

The solution to the system is the ordered pair ( −3,−2 ), so the system
is independent.
:::

:::: {#fs-id1165133184270 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Solve the following system of equations by graphing.

$$\begin{array}{l}
{2x - 5y = -25} \\
{- 4x + 5y = 35}
\end{array}$$

The solution to the system is the ordered pair ( −5,3 ).
::::

:::: {#fs-id1165132036982 .note}
::: title
:::

Q&A

*Can graphing be used if the system is inconsistent or dependent?*

*Yes, in both cases we can still graph the system to determine the type
of system and solution. If the two lines are parallel, the system has no
solution and is inconsistent. If the two lines are identical, the system
has infinite solutions and is a dependent system.*
::::

# Solving Systems of Equations by Substitution {#fs-id1165135192374}

Solving a linear system in two variables by graphing works well when the
solution consists of integer values, but if our solution contains
decimals or fractions, it is not the most precise method. We will
consider two more methods of solving a system of linear equations that
are more precise than graphing. One such method is solving a system of
equations by the substitution method, in which we solve one of the
equations for one variable and then substitute the result into the
second equation to solve for the second variable. Recall that we can
solve for only one variable at a time, which is the reason the
substitution method is both valuable and practical.

:::: {#fs-id1165137730313 .note}
::: title
:::

How To

*Given a system of two equations in two variables, solve using the
substitution method.*

Solve one of the two equations for one of the variables in terms of the
other.

Substitute the expression for this variable into the second equation,
then solve for the remaining variable.

Substitute that solution into either of the original equations to find
the value of the first variable. If possible, write the solution as an
ordered pair.

Check the solution in both equations.
::::

::: {#Example_09_01_03 .example}
Solve the following system of equations by substitution.

$$\begin{array}{l}
{- x + y = -5} \\
{2x - 5y = 1}
\end{array}$$

First, we will solve the first equation for y.

$$\begin{array}{l}
{- x + y = -5} \\
{y = x-5}
\end{array}$$

Now we can substitute the expression x−5 for y in the second equation.

$$\begin{array}{l}
{2x - 5y = 1} \\
{2x - 5(x - 5) = 1} \\
{2x - 5x + 25 = 1} \\
{- 3x = -24} \\
{x = 8}
\end{array}$$

Now, we substitute x=8 into the first equation and solve for y.

$$\begin{array}{l}
{- (8) + y = -5} \\
{y = 3}
\end{array}$$

Our solution is ( 8,3 ).

Check the solution by substituting ( 8,3 ) into both equations.

$$\begin{array}{llll}
{- x + y = - 5} & & & \\
{- (8) + (3) = - 5} & & & \text{True} \\
{2x - 5y = 1} & & & \\
{2(8) - 5(3) = 1} & & & \text{True}
\end{array}$$
:::

:::: {#fs-id1165135450312 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Solve the following system of equations by substitution.

$$\begin{array}{l}
{x = y + 3} \\
{4 = 3x-2y}
\end{array}$$

( −2,−5 )
::::

:::: {#fs-id1165137598962 .note}
::: title
:::

Q&A

*Can the substitution method be used to solve any linear system in two
variables?*

*Yes, but the method works best if one of the equations contains a
coefficient of 1 or --1 so that we do not have to deal with fractions.*
::::

# Solving Systems of Equations in Two Variables by the Addition Method {#fs-id1165132972949}

A third method of solving systems of linear equations is the addition
method. In this method, we add two terms with the same variable, but
opposite coefficients, so that the sum is zero. Of course, not all
systems are set up with the two terms of one variable having opposite
coefficients. Often we must adjust one or both of the equations by
multiplication so that one variable will be eliminated by addition.

:::: {#fs-id1165134555002 .note}
::: title
:::

How To

*Given a system of equations, solve using the addition method.*

Write both equations with

x

\- and

y

-variables on the left side of the equal sign and constants on the
right.

Write one equation above the other, lining up corresponding variables.
If one of the variables in the top equation has the opposite coefficient
of the same variable in the bottom equation, add the equations together,
eliminating one variable. If not, use multiplication by a nonzero number
so that one of the variables in the top equation has the opposite
coefficient of the same variable in the bottom equation, then add the
equations to eliminate the variable.

Solve the resulting equation for the remaining variable.

Substitute that value into one of the original equations and solve for
the second variable.

Check the solution by substituting the values into the other equation.
::::

::: {#Example_09_01_04 .example}
Solve the given system of equations by addition.

$$\begin{array}{l}
{x + 2y = -1} \\
{- x + y = 3}
\end{array}$$

Both equations are already set equal to a constant. Notice that the
coefficient of x in the second equation, --1, is the opposite of the
coefficient of x in the first equation, 1. We can add the two equations
to eliminate x without needing to multiply by a constant.

$$\frac{\begin{array}{l}
 \\
{x + 2y = - 1} \\
{- x + y = 3}
\end{array}}{3y = 2}$$

Now that we have eliminated x, we can solve the resulting equation for
y.

$$\begin{array}{l}
{3y = 2} \\
{y = \frac{2}{3}}
\end{array}$$

Then, we substitute this value for y into one of the original equations
and solve for x.

$$\begin{array}{l}
{- x + y = 3} \\
{- x + \frac{2}{3} = 3} \\
{- x = 3 - \frac{2}{3}} \\
{- x = \frac{7}{3}} \\
{x = - \frac{7}{3}}
\end{array}$$

The solution to this system is ( − 7 3 , 2 3 ).

Check the solution in the first equation.

$$\begin{array}{llll}
{x + 2y = -1} & & & \\
{\left( {- \frac{7}{3}} \right) + 2\left( \frac{2}{3} \right) =} & & & \\
{- \frac{7}{3} + \frac{4}{3} =} & & & \\
{- \frac{3}{3} =} & & & \\
{-1 = -1} & & & \text{True}
\end{array}$$

We gain an important perspective on systems of equations by looking at
the graphical representation. See [\#](#) to find that the equations
intersect at the solution. We do not need to ask whether there may be a
second solution because observing the graph confirms that the system has
exactly one solution.

<figure id="Figure_09_01_004">

</figure>
:::

::: {#Example_09_01_05 .example}
Solve the given system of equations by the addition method.

$$\begin{array}{l}
{3x + 5y = -11} \\
 \\
{\mspace{9mu} x - 2y = 11}
\end{array}$$

Adding these equations as presented will not eliminate a variable.
However, we see that the first equation has 3x in it and the second
equation has x. So if we multiply the second equation by −3, the
*x*-terms will add to zero.

$$\begin{array}{llll}
{x-2y = 11} & & & \\
{-3(x-2y) = -3(11)} & & & {\text{Multiply~both~sides~by~}-3.} \\
{-3x + 6y = -33} & & & {\text{Use~the~distributive~property}.}
\end{array}$$

Now, let's add them.

$$\begin{array}{l}
\underset{\operatorname{\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_}}{\begin{array}{l}
 \\
\begin{array}{l}
{\mspace{9mu}\text{~~}3x + 5y = -11} \\
{-3x + 6y = -33}
\end{array}
\end{array}} \\
{\mspace{9mu}\text{~~~~~~~~}11y = -44} \\
{\mspace{9mu}\text{~~~~~~~~~~~~}y = -4}
\end{array}$$

For the last step, we substitute y=−4 into one of the original equations
and solve for x.

$$\begin{matrix}
{\mspace{9mu} 3x + 5y = - 11} \\
{\mspace{9mu} 3x + 5( - 4) = - 11} \\
{\mspace{9mu} 3x - 20 = - 11} \\
{\mspace{9mu} 3x = 9} \\
{\mspace{9mu} x = 3}
\end{matrix}$$

Our solution is the ordered pair ( 3,−4 ). See [\#](#). Check the
solution in the original second equation.

$$\begin{array}{llll}
{\mspace{9mu} x - 2y = 11} & & & \\
{(3) - 2( - 4) = 3 + 8} & & & \\
{\mspace{9mu} 11 = 11} & & & \text{True}
\end{array}$$

<figure id="Figure_09_01_005">

</figure>
:::

:::: {#fs-id1165132914098 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Solve the system of equations by addition.

$$\begin{matrix}
{2x-7y = 2} \\
{3x + y = -20}
\end{matrix}$$

( −6,−2 )
::::

::: {#Example_09_01_06 .example}
Solve the given system of equations in two variables by addition.

$$\begin{matrix}
{2x + 3y = -16} \\
{5x-10y = 30}
\end{matrix}$$

One equation has 2x and the other has 5x. The least common multiple is
10x so we will have to multiply both equations by a constant in order to
eliminate one variable. Let's eliminate x by multiplying the first
equation by −5 and the second equation by 2.

$$\begin{array}{l}
{~ - 5(2x + 3y) = - 5(-16)} \\
{\mspace{9mu}\text{~~~} - 10x - 15y = 80} \\
{\mspace{9mu}\text{~~~~~}2(5x - 10y) = 2(30)} \\
{\mspace{9mu}\text{~~~~~~~~}10x - 20y = 60}
\end{array}$$

Then, we add the two equations together.

$$\begin{array}{l}
\underset{\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_}{\begin{array}{l}
 \\
\begin{array}{l}
{-10x-15y=80\mspace{9mu}\text{~~}} \\
{10x-20y=60}
\end{array}
\end{array}} \\
{-35y = 140} \\
{y = -4}
\end{array}$$

Substitute y=−4 into the original first equation.

$$\begin{matrix}
{2x + 3(-4) = -16} \\
{\mspace{9mu} 2x - 12 = -16} \\
{\mspace{9mu} 2x = -4} \\
{\mspace{9mu} x = -2}
\end{matrix}$$

The solution is ( −2,−4 ). Check it in the other equation.

$$\begin{array}{r}
{\mspace{9mu}\text{~~~~~~~~~}5x-10y = 30} \\
{5(-2)-10(-4) = 30} \\
{\mspace{9mu}\text{~~~~~~~~}-10 + 40 = 30} \\
{\mspace{9mu}\text{~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~}30 = 30}
\end{array}$$

See [\#](#).

<figure id="Figure_09_01_006">

</figure>
:::

::: {#Example_09_01_07 .example}
Solve the given system of equations in two variables by addition.

$$\begin{array}{l}
{\frac{x}{3} + \frac{y}{6} = 3} \\
{\frac{x}{2} - \frac{y}{4} = \mspace{9mu}\mspace{9mu} 1}
\end{array}$$

First clear each equation of fractions by multiplying both sides of the
equation by the least common denominator.

$$\begin{array}{l}
{6\left( {\frac{x}{3} + \frac{y}{6}} \right) = 6(3)} \\
{\mspace{9mu}\text{~~~}2x + y = 18} \\
{4\left( {\frac{x}{2} - \frac{y}{4}} \right) = 4(1)} \\
{\mspace{9mu}\text{~~~}2x - y = 4}
\end{array}$$

Now multiply the second equation by −1 so that we can eliminate the
*x*-variable.

$$\begin{array}{l}
{-1(2x - y) = -1(4)} \\
{\mspace{9mu}\text{~~~}-2x + y = -4}
\end{array}$$

Add the two equations to eliminate the *x*-variable and solve the
resulting equation.

$$\begin{array}{l}
{2x + y = 18} \\
\underset{\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_}{-2x+y=-4} \\
{2y = 14} \\
{y = 7}
\end{array}$$

Substitute y=7 into the first equation.

$$\begin{array}{l}
{2x + (7) = 18} \\
{\mspace{9mu}\text{~~~~~~~~}2x = 11} \\
{\mspace{9mu}\text{~~~~~~~~~~}x = \frac{11}{2}} \\
{\mspace{9mu}\text{~~~~~~~~~~~~} = 5.5}
\end{array}$$

The solution is ( 11 2 ,7 ). Check it in the other equation.

$$\begin{matrix}
{\mspace{9mu}\frac{x}{2} - \frac{y}{4} = 1} \\
{\frac{\frac{11}{2}}{2} - \frac{7}{4} = 1} \\
{\mspace{9mu}\frac{11}{4} - \frac{7}{4} = 1} \\
{\mspace{9mu}\frac{4}{4} = 1}
\end{matrix}$$
:::

:::: {#fs-id1165134485606 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Solve the system of equations by addition.

$$\begin{array}{lcr}
{2x + 3y} & = & 8 \\
{3x + 5y} & = & 10
\end{array}$$

( 10,−4 )
::::

# Identifying Inconsistent Systems of Equations Containing Two Variables {#fs-id1165135462954}

Now that we have several methods for solving systems of equations, we
can use the methods to identify inconsistent systems. Recall that an
inconsistent system consists of parallel lines that have the same slope
but different y -intercepts. They will never intersect. When searching
for a solution to an inconsistent system, we will come up with a false
statement, such as 12=0.

::: {#Example_09_01_08 .example}
Solve the following system of equations.

$$\begin{array}{l}
{x = 9-2y} \\
{x + 2y = 13}
\end{array}$$

We can approach this problem in two ways. Because one equation is
already solved for x, the most obvious step is to use substitution.

$$\begin{array}{l}
{\mspace{9mu} x + 2y = 13} \\
{\mspace{9mu}(9 - 2y) + 2y = 13} \\
{\mspace{9mu} 9 + 0y = 13} \\
{\mspace{9mu} 9 = 13}
\end{array}$$

Clearly, this statement is a contradiction because 9≠13. Therefore, the
system has no solution.

The second approach would be to first manipulate the equations so that
they are both in slope-intercept form. We manipulate the first equation
as follows.

$$\begin{array}{l}
{\mspace{9mu} x = 9-2y} \\
{2y = - x + 9} \\
{\mspace{9mu} y = - \frac{1}{2}x + \frac{9}{2}}
\end{array}$$

We then convert the second equation expressed to slope-intercept form.

$$\begin{array}{l}
{x + 2y = 13} \\
{\mspace{9mu} 2y = - x + 13} \\
{\mspace{9mu} y = - \frac{1}{2}x + \frac{13}{2}}
\end{array}$$

Comparing the equations, we see that they have the same slope but
different *y*-intercepts. Therefore, the lines are parallel and do not
intersect.

$$\begin{array}{l}
\begin{array}{l}
 \\
{y = - \frac{1}{2}x + \frac{9}{2}}
\end{array} \\
{y = - \frac{1}{2}x + \frac{13}{2}}
\end{array}$$

Writing the equations in slope-intercept form confirms that the system
is inconsistent because all lines will intersect eventually unless they
are parallel. Parallel lines will never intersect; thus, the two lines
have no points in common. The graphs of the equations in this example
are shown in [\#](#).

<figure id="Figure_09_01_007">

</figure>
:::

:::: {#fs-id1165134258368 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Solve the following system of equations in two variables.

$$\begin{array}{l}
{2y-2x = 2} \\
{2y-2x = 6}
\end{array}$$

No solution. It is an inconsistent system.
::::

# Expressing the Solution of a System of Dependent Equations Containing Two Variables {#fs-id1165135189716}

Recall that a dependent system of equations in two variables is a system
in which the two equations represent the same line. Dependent systems
have an infinite number of solutions because all of the points on one
line are also on the other line. After using substitution or addition,
the resulting equation will be an identity, such as 0=0.

::: {#Example_09_01_09 .example}
Find a solution to the system of equations using the addition method.

$$\begin{matrix}
{\mspace{9mu} x + 3y = 2} \\
{3x + 9y = 6}
\end{matrix}$$

With the addition method, we want to eliminate one of the variables by
adding the equations. In this case, let's focus on eliminating x. If we
multiply both sides of the first equation by −3, then we will be able to
eliminate the x -variable.

$$\begin{array}{l}
{\mspace{9mu} x + 3y = 2} \\
{~(-3)(x + 3y) = (-3)(2)} \\
{\mspace{9mu}-3x - 9y = - 6}
\end{array}$$

Now add the equations.

$$\begin{array}{l}
\underset{\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_}{\begin{array}{ll}
{\mspace{9mu}-3x-9y} & {=-6} \\
{+\mspace{9mu} 3x+9y} & {=6}
\end{array}} \\
\begin{array}{ll}
{\mspace{9mu} 0} & {= 0}
\end{array}
\end{array}$$

We can see that there will be an infinite number of solutions that
satisfy both equations.

If we rewrote both equations in the slope-intercept form, we might know
what the solution would look like before adding. Let's look at what
happens when we convert the system to slope-intercept form.

$$\begin{array}{l}
{\mspace{9mu}\ x + 3y = 2} \\
{\mspace{9mu}\text{~~~~~~~}3y = - x + 2} \\
{\mspace{9mu}\text{~~~~~~~~~}y = - \frac{1}{3}x + \frac{2}{3}} \\
{3x + 9y = 6} \\
{\mspace{9mu}\text{~~~~~~~}9y = -3x + 6} \\
{\mspace{9mu}\text{~~~~~~~~~}y = - \frac{3}{9}x + \frac{6}{9}} \\
{\mspace{9mu}\text{~~~~~~~~~}y = - \frac{1}{3}x + \frac{2}{3}}
\end{array}$$

See [\#](#). Notice the results are the same. The general solution to
the system is ( x, − 1 3 x+ 2 3 ).

<figure id="Figure_09_01_008">

</figure>
:::

:::: {#fs-id1165135536131 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Solve the following system of equations in two variables.

$$\begin{array}{l}
\begin{array}{l}
 \\
{\mspace{9mu}\text{~~~}y-2x = 5}
\end{array} \\
{-3y + 6x = -15}
\end{array}$$

The system is dependent so there are infinite solutions of the form
(x,2x+5).
::::

# Using Systems of Equations to Investigate Profits {#fs-id1165135559421}

Using what we have learned about systems of equations, we can return to
the skateboard manufacturing problem at the beginning of the section.
The skateboard manufacturer's revenue function is the function used to
calculate the amount of money that comes into the business. It can be
represented by the equation R=xp, where x= quantity and p= price. The
revenue function is shown in orange in [\#](#).

The cost function is the function used to calculate the costs of doing
business. It includes fixed costs, such as rent and salaries, and
variable costs, such as utilities. The cost function is shown in blue in
[\#](#). The x -axis represents quantity in hundreds of units. The
*y*-axis represents either cost or revenue in hundreds of dollars.

<figure id="Figure_09_01_009">

</figure>

The point at which the two lines intersect is called the break-even
point. We can see from the graph that if 700 units are produced, the
cost is \$3,300 and the revenue is also \$3,300. In other words, the
company breaks even if they produce and sell 700 units. They neither
make money nor lose money.

The shaded region to the right of the break-even point represents
quantities for which the company makes a profit. The shaded region to
the left represents quantities for which the company suffers a loss. The
profit function is the revenue function minus the cost function, written
as P(x)=R(x)−C(x). Clearly, knowing the quantity for which the cost
equals the revenue is of great importance to businesses.

::: {#Example_09_01_010 .example}
Given the cost function C(x)=0.85x+35,000 and the revenue function
R(x)=1.55x, find the break-even point and the profit function.

Write the system of equations using y to replace function notation.

$$\begin{array}{l}
\begin{array}{l}
 \\
{y = 0.85x + 35,000}
\end{array} \\
{y = 1.55x}
\end{array}$$

Substitute the expression 0.85x+35,000 from the first equation into the
second equation and solve for x.

$$\begin{matrix}
{0.85x + 35,000 = 1.55x} \\
{\mspace{9mu} 35,000 = 0.7x} \\
{\mspace{9mu} 50,000 = x}
\end{matrix}$$

Then, we substitute x=50,000 into either the cost function or the
revenue function.

$$1.55(50,000) = 77,500$$

The break-even point is ( 50,000,77,500 ).

The profit function is found using the formula P(x)=R(x)−C(x).

$$\begin{array}{l}
{P(x) = 1.55x - (0.85x + 35,000)} \\
{\mspace{9mu}\text{~~~~~~~} = 0.7x - 35,000}
\end{array}$$

The profit function is P(x)=0.7x−35,000.

The cost to produce 50,000 units is \$77,500, and the revenue from the
sales of 50,000 units is also \$77,500. To make a profit, the business
must produce and sell more than 50,000 units. See [\#](#).

<figure id="Figure_09_01_010">

</figure>

We see from the graph in [\#](#) that the profit function has a negative
value until x=50,000, when the graph crosses the *x*-axis. Then, the
graph emerges into positive *y*-values and continues on this path as the
profit function is a straight line. This illustrates that the break-even
point for businesses occurs when the profit function is 0. The area to
the left of the break-even point represents operating at a loss.

<figure id="Figure_09_01_011">

</figure>
:::

::: {#Example_09_01_011 .example}
The cost of a ticket to the circus is \$25.00 for children and \$50.00
for adults. On a certain day, attendance at the circus is 2,000 and the
total gate revenue is \$70,000. How many children and how many adults
bought tickets?

Let *c* = the number of children and *a* = the number of adults in
attendance.

The total number of people is 2,000. We can use this to write an
equation for the number of people at the circus that day.

$$c + a = 2,000$$

The revenue from all children can be found by multiplying \$25.00 by the
number of children, 25c. The revenue from all adults can be found by
multiplying \$50.00 by the number of adults, 50a. The total revenue is
\$70,000. We can use this to write an equation for the revenue.

$$25c + 50a = 70,000$$

We now have a system of linear equations in two variables.

$$\begin{matrix}
{\mspace{9mu} c + a = 2,000} \\
{25c + 50a = 70,000}
\end{matrix}$$

In the first equation, the coefficient of both variables is 1. We can
quickly solve the first equation for either c or a. We will solve for a.

$$\begin{matrix}
{c + a = 2,000} \\
{a = 2,000 - c}
\end{matrix}$$

Substitute the expression 2,000−c in the second equation for a and solve
for c.

$$\begin{array}{l}
{25c + 50(2,000 - c) = 70,000} \\
{25c + 100,000 - 50c = 70,000} \\
{- 25c = -30,000} \\
{c = 1,200}
\end{array}$$

Substitute c=1,200 into the first equation to solve for a.

$$\begin{array}{l}
{1,200 + a = 2,000} \\
{a = 800}
\end{array}$$

We find that 1,200 children and 800 adults bought tickets to the circus
that day.
:::

:::: {#fs-id1165135257013 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Meal tickets at the circus cost \$4.00 for children and \$12.00 for
adults. If 1,650 meal tickets were bought for a total of \$14,200, how
many children and how many adults bought meal tickets?

700 children, 950 adults
::::

:::: {#fs-id1165134483380 .note}
::: title
:::

Media

Access these online resources for additional instruction and practice
with systems of linear equations.

Solving Systems of Equations Using Substitution

Solving Systems of Equations Using Elimination

Applications of Systems of Equations
::::

# Key Concepts {#fs-id1165133308519}

A system of linear equations consists of two or more equations made up
of two or more variables such that all equations in the system are
considered simultaneously.

The solution to a system of linear equations in two variables is any
ordered pair that satisfies each equation independently. See

.

Systems of equations are classified as independent with one solution,
dependent with an infinite number of solutions, or inconsistent with no
solution.

One method of solving a system of linear equations in two variables is
by graphing. In this method, we graph the equations on the same set of
axes. See

.

Another method of solving a system of linear equations is by
substitution. In this method, we solve for one variable in one equation
and substitute the result into the second equation. See

.

A third method of solving a system of linear equations is by addition,
in which we can eliminate a variable by adding opposite coefficients of
corresponding variables. See

.

It is often necessary to multiply one or both equations by a constant to
facilitate elimination of a variable when adding the two equations
together. See

,

, and

.

Either method of solving a system of equations results in a false
statement for inconsistent systems because they are made up of parallel
lines that never intersect. See

.

The solution to a system of dependent equations will always be true
because both equations describe the same line. See

.

Systems of equations can be used to solve real-world problems that
involve more than one variable, such as those relating to revenue, cost,
and profit. See

and

.

# Section Exercises {#fs-id1165135186955}

## Verbal {#fs-id1165135186958}

Can a system of linear equations have exactly two solutions? Explain why
or why not.

No, you can either have zero, one, or infinitely many. Examine graphs.

If you are performing a break-even analysis for a business and their
cost and revenue equations are dependent, explain what this means for
the company's profit margins.

If you are solving a break-even analysis and get a negative break-even
point, explain what this signifies for the company?

This means there is no realistic break-even point. By the time the
company produces one unit they are already making profit.

If you are solving a break-even analysis and there is no break-even
point, explain what this means for the company. How should they ensure
there is a break-even point?

Given a system of equations, explain at least two different methods of
solving that system.

You can solve by substitution (isolating x or y ), graphically, or by
addition.

## Algebraic {#fs-id1165133232429}

For the following exercises, determine whether the given ordered pair is
a solution to the system of equations.

5x−y=4 x+6y=2 and (4,0)

−3x−5y=13 −x+4y=10 and (−6,1)

Yes

3x+7y=1 2x+4y=0 and (2,3)

−2x+5y=7 2x+9y=7 and (−1,1)

Yes

x+8y=43 3x−2y=−1 and (3,5)

For the following exercises, solve each system by substitution.

x+3y=5 2x+3y=4

(−1,2)

3x−2y=18 5x+10y=−10

4x+2y=−10 3x+9y=0

(−3,1)

2x+4y=−3.8 9x−5y=1.3

−2x+3y=1.2 −3x−6y=1.8

( − 3 5 ,0 )

x−0.2y=1 −10x+2y=5

3x+5y=9 30x+50y=−90

No solutions exist.

−3x+y=2 12x−4y=−8

1 2 x+ 1 3 y=16 1 6 x+ 1 4 y=9

( 72 5 , 132 5 )

− 1 4 x+ 3 2 y=11 − 1 8 x+ 1 3 y=3

For the following exercises, solve each system by addition.

−2x+5y=−42 7x+2y=30

( 6,−6 )

6x−5y=−34 2x+6y=4

5x−y=−2.6 −4x−6y=1.4

( − 1 2 , 1 10 )

7x−2y=3 4x+5y=3.25

−x+2y=−1 5x−10y=6

No solutions exist.

7x+6y=2 −28x−24y=−8

5 6 x+ 1 4 y=0 1 8 x− 1 2 y=− 43 120

( − 1 5 , 2 3 )

1 3 x+ 1 9 y= 2 9 − 1 2 x+ 4 5 y=− 1 3

−0.2x+0.4y=0.6 x−2y=−3

( x, x+3 2 )

−0.1x+0.2y=0.6 5x−10y=1

For the following exercises, solve each system by any method.

5x+9y=16 x+2y=4

(−4,4)

6x−8y=−0.6 3x+2y=0.9

5x−2y=2.25 7x−4y=3

( 1 2 , 1 8 )

x− 5 12 y=− 55 12 −6x+ 5 2 y= 55 2

7x−4y= 7 6 2x+4y= 1 3

( 1 6 ,0 )

3x+6y=11 2x+4y=9

7 3 x− 1 6 y=2 − 21 6 x+ 3 12 y=−3

( x,2(7x−6) )

1 2 x+ 1 3 y= 1 3 3 2 x+ 1 4 y=− 1 8

2.2x+1.3y=−0.1 4.2x+4.2y=2.1

( − 5 6 , 4 3 )

0.1x+0.2y=2 0.35x−0.3y=0

## Graphical {#fs-id1165135518201}

For the following exercises, graph the system of equations and state
whether the system is consistent, inconsistent, or dependent and whether
the system has one solution, no solution, or infinite solutions.

3x−y=0.6 x−2y=1.3

Consistent with one solution

−x+2y=4 2x−4y=1

x+2y=7 2x+6y=12

Consistent with one solution

3x−5y=7 x−2y=3

3x−2y=5 −9x+6y=−15

Dependent with infinitely many solutions

## Technology {#fs-id1165133290332}

For the following exercises, use the intersect function on a graphing
device to solve each system. Round all answers to the nearest hundredth.

0.1x+0.2y=0.3 −0.3x+0.5y=1

−0.01x+0.12y=0.62 0.15x+0.20y=0.52

( −3.08,4.91 )

0.5x+0.3y=4 0.25x−0.9y=0.46

0.15x+0.27y=0.39 −0.34x+0.56y=1.8

( −1.52,2.29 )

−0.71x+0.92y=0.13 0.83x+0.05y=2.1

## Extensions {#fs-id1165134113096}

For the following exercises, solve each system in terms of A,B,C,D,E,
and F where A--F are nonzero numbers. Note that A≠B and AE≠BD.

x+y=A x−y=B

( A+B 2 , A−B 2 )

x+Ay=1 x+By=1

Ax+y=0 Bx+y=1

( −1 A−B , A A−B )

Ax+By=C x+y=1

Ax+By=C Dx+Ey=F

( CE−BF BD−AE , AF−CD BD−AE )

## Real-World Applications {#fs-id1165135702580}

For the following exercises, solve for the desired quantity.

A stuffed animal business has a total cost of production C=12x+30 and a
revenue function R=20x. Find the break-even point.

An Ethiopian restaurant has a cost of production C(x)=11x+120 and a
revenue function R(x)=5x. When does the company start to turn a profit?

They never turn a profit.

A cell phone factory has a cost of production C(x)=150x+10,000 and a
revenue function R(x)=200x. What is the break-even point?

A musician charges C(x)=64x+20,000 where x is the total number of
attendees at the concert. The venue charges \$80 per ticket. After how
many people buy tickets does the venue break even, and what is the value
of the total tickets sold at that point?

(1,250,100,000)

A guitar factory has a cost of production C(x)=75x+50,000. If the
company needs to break even after 150 units sold, at what price should
they sell each guitar? Round up to the nearest dollar, and write the
revenue function.

For the following exercises, use a system of linear equations with two
variables and two equations to solve.

Find two numbers whose sum is 28 and difference is 13.

The numbers are 7.5 and 20.5.

A number is 9 more than another number. Twice the sum of the two numbers
is 10. Find the two numbers.

The startup cost for a restaurant is \$120,000, and each meal costs \$10
for the restaurant to make. If each meal is then sold for \$15, after
how many meals does the restaurant break even?

24,000

A moving company charges a flat rate of \$150, and an additional \$5 for
each box. If a taxi service would charge \$20 for each box, how many
boxes would you need for it to be cheaper to use the moving company, and
what would be the total cost?

A total of 1,595 first- and second-year college students gathered at a
pep rally. The number of first-years exceeded the number of second-years
by 15. How many students from each year group were in attendance?

790 second-year students, 805 first-year students

276 students enrolled in an introductory chemistry class. By the end of
the semester, 5 times the number of students passed as failed. Find the
number of students who passed, and the number of students who failed.

There were 130 faculty at a conference. If there were 18 more women than
men attending, how many of each gender attended the conference?

56 men, 74 women

A jeep and a pickup truck enter a highway running east-west at the same
exit heading in opposite directions. The jeep entered the highway 30
minutes before the pickup did, and traveled 7 mph slower than the
pickup. After 2 hours from the time the pickup entered the highway, the
cars were 306.5 miles apart. Find the speed of each car, assuming they
were driven on cruise control and retained the same speed.

If a scientist mixed 10% saline solution with 60% saline solution to get
25 gallons of 40% saline solution, how many gallons of 10% and 60%
solutions were mixed?

10 gallons of 10% solution, 15 gallons of 60% solution

An investor earned triple the profits of what they earned last year. If
they made \$500,000.48 total for both years, how much did the investor
earn in profits each year?

An investor invested 1.1 million dollars into two land investments. On
the first investment, Swan Peak, her return was a 110% increase on the
money she invested. On the second investment, Riverside Community, she
earned 50% over what she invested. If she earned \$1 million in profits,
how much did she invest in each of the land deals?

Swan Peak: \$750,000, Riverside: \$350,000

If an investor invests a total of \$25,000 into two bonds, one that pays
3% simple interest, and the other that pays 2 7 8 % interest, and the
investor earns \$737.50 annual interest, how much was invested in each
account?

If an investor invests \$23,000 into two bonds, one that pays 4% in
simple interest, and the other paying 2% simple interest, and the
investor earns \$710.00 annual interest, how much was invested in each
account?

\$12,500 in the first account, \$10,500 in the second account.

Blu-rays cost \$5.96 more than regular DVDs at All Bets Are Off
Electronics. How much would 6 Blu-rays and 2 DVDs cost if 5 Blu-rays and
2 DVDs cost \$127.73?

A store clerk sold 60 pairs of sneakers. The high-tops sold for \$98.99
and the low-tops sold for \$129.99. If the receipts for the two types of
sales totaled \$6,404.40, how many of each type of sneaker were sold?

High-tops: 45, Low-tops: 15

A concert manager counted 350 ticket receipts the day after a concert.
The price for a student ticket was \$12.50, and the price for an adult
ticket was \$16.00. The register confirms that \$5,075 was taken in. How
many student tickets and adult tickets were sold?

Admission into an amusement park for 4 children and 2 adults is
\$116.90. For 6 children and 3 adults, the admission is \$175.35.
Assuming a different price for children and adults, what is the price of
the child's ticket and the price of the adult ticket?

Infinitely many solutions. We need more information.

# 

addition method

an algebraic technique used to solve systems of linear equations in
which the equations are added in a way that eliminates one variable,
allowing the resulting equation to be solved for the remaining variable;
substitution is then used to solve for the first variable

break-even point

the point at which a cost function intersects a revenue function; where
profit is zero

consistent system

a system for which there is a single solution to all equations in the
system and it is an independent system, or if there are an infinite
number of solutions and it is a dependent system

cost function

the function used to calculate the costs of doing business; it usually
has two parts, fixed costs and variable costs

dependent system

a system of linear equations in which the two equations represent the
same line; there are an infinite number of solutions to a dependent
system

inconsistent system

a system of linear equations with no common solution because they
represent parallel lines, which have no point or line in common

independent system

a system of linear equations with exactly one solution pair

(

x

,

y

)

profit function

the profit function is written as

P

(

x

)

=

R

(

x

)

−

C

(

x

)

,

revenue minus cost

revenue function

the function that is used to calculate revenue, simply written as

R

=

x

p

,

where

x

=

quantity and

p

=

price

substitution method

an algebraic technique used to solve systems of linear equations in
which one of the two equations is solved for one variable and then
substituted into the second equation to solve for the second variable

system of linear equations

a set of two or more equations in two or more variables that must be
considered simultaneously.
