m49436

> In this section, you will:
>
> Evaluate ŌĆē2 ├Ś 2ŌĆē determinants.
>
> Use Cramer's Rule to solve a system of equations in two variables.
>
> Evaluate ŌĆē3 ├Ś 3ŌĆē determinants.
>
> Use Cramer's Rule to solve a system of three equations in three
> variables.
>
> Know the properties of determinants.

e75dadb0-5d43-42f2-8e78-0ad237f10096

#  {#eip-505}

## Learning Objectives {#eip-824}

Use Cramer's Rule to solve systems of equations (IA 4.6.3)

## Objective 1: Use Cramer's Rule to solve systems of equations (IA 4.6.3) {#eip-886}

Cramer's Rule uses determinants to solve systems of equations.

::: {#eip-223 .example}
Use Cramer's rule to solve the system of equations.

-2x+3y=3x+3y=12

  -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ----------------------------
  Evaluate the determinant of the system by using the coefficients of the variables                              D=-2313=-6-3=-9
  Evaluate the determinant Dx. Replace the coefficients of the variable x, -2 and 1, by the constants 3 and 12   Dx=33123=9-36=-27
  Evaluate the determinant Dy. Replace the coefficients of the variable y, 3 and 3, by the constants 3 and 12    Dy=-23112=-24-3=-27
  Find x and y                                                                                                   x=DxD=-27-9=3y=DyD=-27-9=3
  Write the solution as an ordered pair                                                                          (3, 3)
  Check the solution in the original equations                                                                   
  -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ----------------------------
:::

### Practice Makes Perfect {#eip-859}

Use Cramer's Rule to solve the system of equations.

3x+8y=-32x+5y=-3

::: {#eip-831 .example}
Solve the system of equations using Cramer's Rule:
{3xŌłÆ5y+4z=55x+2y+z=02x+3yŌłÆ2z=3.

  ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ----------------------------
  Evaluate the determinant *D*.                                                       
  Expand by minors using column 1.                                                    
                                                                                      
  Evaluate the determinants.                                                          
  Simplify.                                                                           
  Simplify.                                                                           
  Simplify.                                                                           
  Evaluate the determinant Dx. Use theconstants to replace the coefficients of *x*.   
  Expand by minors using column 1.                                                    
  Evaluate the determinants.                                                          
  Simplify.                                                                           
  Simplify.                                                                           
  Evaluate the determinant Dy. Use theconstants to replace the coefficients of *y*.   
                                                                                      
  Evaluate the determinants.                                                          
  Simplify.                                                                           
  Simplify.                                                                           
  Simplify.                                                                           
  Evaluate the determinant Dz. Use theconstants to replace the coefficients of *z*.   
                                                                                      
  Evaluate the determinants.                                                          
  Simplify.                                                                           
  Simplify.                                                                           
  Simplify.                                                                           
  Find *x*, *y*, and *z*.                                                             
  Substitute in the values.                                                           
  Simplify.                                                                           
  Write the solution as an ordered triple.                                            
  Check that the ordered triple is a solutionto *all three* original equations.       We leave the check to you.
                                                                                      The solution is (2,ŌłÆ3,ŌłÆ4).
  ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ----------------------------
:::

### Practice Makes Perfect {#eip-5}

Use Cramer's Rule to solve the system of three equations.

3x+8y+2z=-52x+5y-3z=0x+2y-2z=-1

We have learned how to solve systems of equations in two variables and
three variables, and by multiple methods: substitution, addition,
Gaussian elimination, using the inverse of a matrix, and graphing. Some
of these methods are easier to apply than others and are more
appropriate in certain situations. In this section, we will study two
more strategies for solving systems of equations.

# Evaluating the Determinant of a 2├Ś2 Matrix {#fs-id1423475}

A determinant is a real number that can be very useful in mathematics
because it has multiple applications, such as calculating area, volume,
and other quantities. Here, we will use determinants to reveal whether a
matrix is invertible by using the entries of a square matrix to
determine whether there is a solution to the system of equations.
Perhaps one of the more interesting applications, however, is their use
in cryptography. Secure signals or messages are sometimes sent encoded
in a matrix. The data can only be decrypted with an invertible matrix
and the determinant. For our purposes, we focus on the determinant as an
indication of the invertibility of the matrix. Calculating the
determinant of a matrix involves following the specific patterns that
are outlined in this section.

:::: {#fs-id1305022 .note}
::: title
Find the Determinant of a 2 ├Ś 2 Matrix
:::

The determinant of a 2├Ś2 matrix, given

$$A = \begin{bmatrix}
a & b \\
c & d
\end{bmatrix}$$

is defined as

Notice the change in notation. There are several ways to indicate the
determinant, including det( A ) and replacing the brackets in a matrix
with straight lines, \| A \|.
::::

::: {#Example_09_08_01 .example}
Find the determinant of the given matrix.

$$A = \begin{bmatrix}
5 & 2 \\
{- 6} & 3
\end{bmatrix}$$

$$\begin{array}{l}
{\det(A) = \left| \begin{array}{ll}
5 & 2 \\
{- 6} & 3
\end{array} \right|} \\
{= 5(3) - (-6)(2)} \\
{= 27}
\end{array}$$
:::

# Using Cramer's Rule to Solve a System of Two Equations in Two Variables {#fs-id1420496}

We will now introduce a final method for solving systems of equations
that uses determinants. Known as Cramer's Rule, this technique dates
back to the middle of the 18th century and is named for its innovator,
the Swiss mathematician Gabriel Cramer (1704-1752), who introduced it in
1750 in Introduction ├Ā l\'Analyse des lignes Courbes alg├®briques.
Cramer's Rule is a viable and efficient method for finding solutions to
systems with an arbitrary number of unknowns, provided that we have the
same number of equations as unknowns.

Cramer's Rule will give us the unique solution to a system of equations,
if it exists. However, if the system has no solution or an infinite
number of solutions, this will be indicated by a determinant of zero. To
find out if the system is inconsistent or dependent, another method,
such as elimination, will have to be used.

To understand Cramer's Rule, let's look closely at how we solve systems
of linear equations using basic row operations. Consider a system of two
equations in two variables.

$$\begin{matrix}
{a_{1}x + b_{1}y = c_{1}\mspace{9mu}(1)} \\
{a_{2}x + b_{2}y = c_{2}\mspace{9mu}(2)}
\end{matrix}$$

We eliminate one variable using row operations and solve for the other.
Say that we wish to solve for x. If equation (2) is multiplied by the
opposite of the coefficient of y in equation (1), equation (1) is
multiplied by the coefficient of y in equation (2), and we add the two
equations, the variable y will be eliminated.

$$\begin{array}{l}
\underset{\operatorname{\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_}}{\begin{array}{llll}
 & & & \\
{b_{2}a_{1}x + b_{2}b_{1}y = b_{2}c_{1}} & & & {\text{Multiply~}R_{1}\mspace{9mu}\text{by~}b_{2}} \\
{- b_{1}a_{2}x - b_{1}b_{2}y = - b_{1}c_{2}} & & & {\text{Multiply~}R_{2}\mspace{9mu}\text{by} - b_{1}}
\end{array}} \\
\begin{array}{ll}
{~b_{2}a_{1}x - b_{1}a_{2}x = b_{2}c_{1} - b_{1}c_{2}} & 
\end{array}
\end{array}$$

Now, solve for x.

$$\begin{array}{l}
{b_{2}a_{1}x - b_{1}a_{2}x = b_{2}c_{1} - b_{1}c_{2}} \\
{x(b_{2}a_{1} - b_{1}a_{2}) = b_{2}c_{1} - b_{1}c_{2}} \\
{\text{~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~}x = \frac{b_{2}c_{1} - b_{1}c_{2}}{b_{2}a_{1} - b_{1}a_{2}} = \frac{\left| \begin{array}{ll}
c_{1} & b_{1} \\
c_{2} & b_{2}
\end{array} \right|}{\left| \begin{array}{ll}
a_{1} & b_{1} \\
a_{2} & b_{2}
\end{array} \right|}}
\end{array}$$

Similarly, to solve for y, we will eliminate x.

$$\begin{array}{l}
\underset{\operatorname{\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_}}{\begin{array}{llll}
 & & & \\
{a_{2}a_{1}x + a_{2}b_{1}y = a_{2}c_{1}} & & & {\text{Multiply~}R_{1}\mspace{9mu}\text{by~}a_{2}} \\
{- a_{1}a_{2}x - a_{1}b_{2}y = - a_{1}c_{2}} & & & {\text{Multiply~}R_{2}\mspace{9mu}\text{by} - a_{1}}
\end{array}} \\
\begin{array}{ll}
{a_{2}b_{1}y - a_{1}b_{2}y = a_{2}c_{1} - a_{1}c_{2}} & 
\end{array}
\end{array}$$

Solving for y gives

$$\begin{array}{l}
{a_{2}b_{1}y - a_{1}b_{2}y = a_{2}c_{1} - a_{1}c_{2}} \\
{y(a_{2}b_{1} - a_{1}b_{2}) = a_{2}c_{1} - a_{1}c_{2}} \\
{\text{~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~}y = \frac{a_{2}c_{1} - a_{1}c_{2}}{a_{2}b_{1} - a_{1}b_{2}} = \frac{a_{1}c_{2} - a_{2}c_{1}}{a_{1}b_{2} - a_{2}b_{1}} = \frac{\left| \begin{array}{ll}
a_{1} & c_{1} \\
a_{2} & c_{2}
\end{array} \right|}{\left| \begin{array}{ll}
a_{1} & b_{1} \\
a_{2} & b_{2}
\end{array} \right|}}
\end{array}$$

Notice that the denominator for both x and y is the determinant of the
coefficient matrix.

We can use these formulas to solve for x and y, but Cramer's Rule also
introduces new notation:

D

:

determinant of the coefficient matrix

D

x

:

determinant of the numerator in the solution of

x

$$x = \frac{D_{x}}{D}$$

D

y

:

determinant of the numerator in the solution of

y

$$y = \frac{D_{y}}{D}$$

The key to Cramer's Rule is replacing the variable column of interest
with the constant column and calculating the determinants. We can then
express x and y as a quotient of two determinants.

:::: {#fs-id1357295 .note}
::: title
Cramer's Rule for 2├Ś2 Systems
:::

Cramer's Rule is a method that uses determinants to solve systems of
equations that have the same number of equations as variables.

Consider a system of two linear equations in two variables.

$$\begin{matrix}
{a_{1}x + b_{1}y = c_{1}} \\
{a_{2}x + b_{2}y = c_{2}}
\end{matrix}$$

The solution using Cramer's Rule is given as

$$x = \frac{D_{x}}{D} = \frac{\left| \begin{matrix}
c_{1} & b_{1} \\
c_{2} & b_{2}
\end{matrix} \right|}{\left| \begin{matrix}
a_{1} & b_{1} \\
a_{2} & b_{2}
\end{matrix} \right|},\mspace{9mu} D \neq 0;\mspace{9mu}\mspace{9mu} y = \frac{D_{y}}{D} = \frac{\left| \begin{matrix}
a_{1} & c_{1} \\
a_{2} & c_{2}
\end{matrix} \right|}{\left| \begin{matrix}
a_{1} & b_{1} \\
a_{2} & b_{2}
\end{matrix} \right|},\mspace{9mu} D \neq 0.$$

If we are solving for x, the x column is replaced with the constant
column. If we are solving for y, the y column is replaced with the
constant column.
::::

::: {#Example_09_08_02 .example}
Solve the following 2├Ś2 system using Cramer's Rule.

$$\begin{matrix}
{12x + 3y = 15} \\
{\ 2x - 3y = 13}
\end{matrix}$$

Solve for x.

$$x = \frac{D_{x}}{D} = \frac{\left| \begin{array}{rr}
15 & 3 \\
13 & {- 3}
\end{array} \right|}{\left| \begin{array}{rr}
12 & 3 \\
2 & {- 3}
\end{array} \right|} = \frac{- 45 - 39}{- 36 - 6} = \frac{- 84}{- 42} = 2$$

Solve for y.

$$y = \frac{D_{y}}{D} = \frac{\left| \begin{array}{rr}
12 & 15 \\
2 & 13
\end{array} \right|}{\left| \begin{array}{rr}
12 & 3 \\
2 & {- 3}
\end{array} \right|} = \frac{156 - 30}{- 36 - 6} = - \frac{126}{42} = -3$$

The solution is ( 2,ŌłÆ3 ).
:::

:::: {#fs-id1034376 .note}
::: title
:::

try it feature

Use Cramer's Rule to solve the 2 ├Ś 2 system of equations.

$$\begin{array}{l}
{\ x + 2y = -11} \\
{- 2x + y = -13}
\end{array}$$

( 3,ŌłÆ7 )
::::

# Evaluating the Determinant of a 3 ├Ś 3 Matrix {#fs-id1594718}

Finding the determinant of a 2├Ś2 matrix is straightforward, but finding
the determinant of a 3├Ś3 matrix is more complicated. One method is to
augment the 3├Ś3 matrix with a repetition of the first two columns,
giving a 3├Ś5 matrix. Then we calculate the sum of the products of
entries *down* each of the three diagonals (upper left to lower right),
and subtract the products of entries *up* each of the three diagonals
(lower left to upper right). This is more easily understood with a
visual and an example.

Find the determinant of the 3├Ś3 matrix.

$$A = \begin{bmatrix}
a_{1} & b_{1} & c_{1} \\
a_{2} & b_{2} & c_{2} \\
a_{3} & b_{3} & c_{3}
\end{bmatrix}$$

Augment

A

with the first two columns.

$$\det(A) = \left| {\begin{matrix}
a_{1} & b_{1} & c_{1} \\
a_{2} & b_{2} & c_{2} \\
a_{3} & b_{3} & c_{3}
\end{matrix}\left| \begin{matrix}
a_{1} \\
a_{2} \\
a_{3}
\end{matrix} \right.\begin{matrix}
b_{1} \\
b_{2} \\
b_{3}
\end{matrix}} \right|$$

From upper left to lower right: Multiply the entries down the first
diagonal. Add the result to the product of entries down the second
diagonal. Add this result to the product of the entries down the third
diagonal.

From lower left to upper right: Subtract the product of entries up the
first diagonal. From this result subtract the product of entries up the
second diagonal. From this result, subtract the product of entries up
the third diagonal.

The algebra is as follows:

$$|A| = a_{1}b_{2}c_{3} + b_{1}c_{2}a_{3} + c_{1}a_{2}b_{3} - a_{3}b_{2}c_{1} - b_{3}c_{2}a_{1} - c_{3}a_{2}b_{1}$$

::: {#Example_09_08_03 .example}
Find the determinant of the 3 ├Ś 3 matrix given

$$A = \begin{bmatrix}
0 & 2 & 1 \\
3 & {- 1} & 1 \\
4 & 0 & 1
\end{bmatrix}$$

Augment the matrix with the first two columns and then follow the
formula. Thus,

$$\begin{array}{l}
{|A| = \left| {\begin{array}{lll}
0 & 2 & 1 \\
3 & {- 1} & 1 \\
4 & 0 & 1
\end{array}\left| \begin{array}{l}
0 \\
3 \\
4
\end{array} \right.\begin{array}{l}
2 \\
{- 1} \\
0
\end{array}} \right|} \\
{= 0\left( {- 1} \right)(1) + 2(1)(4) + 1(3)(0) - 4\left( {- 1} \right)(1) - 0(1)(0) - 1(3)(2)} \\
{= 0 + 8 + 0 + 4 - 0 - 6} \\
{= 6}
\end{array}$$
:::

:::: {#fs-id1664049 .note}
::: title
:::

try it feature

Find the determinant of the 3 ├Ś 3 matrix.

$$\det(A) = \left| \begin{matrix}
1 & {- 3} & 7 \\
1 & 1 & 1 \\
1 & {- 2} & 3
\end{matrix} \right|$$

ŌłÆ10
::::

:::: {#fs-id1424491 .note}
::: title
:::

qa feature

*Can we use the same method to find the determinant of a larger matrix?*

*No, this method only works for 2├Ś2 and 3├Ś3 matrices. For larger
matrices it is best to use a graphing utility or computer software.*
::::

# Using Cramer's Rule to Solve a System of Three Equations in Three Variables {#fs-id1420022}

Now that we can find the determinant of a 3 ├Ś 3 matrix, we can apply
Cramer's Rule to solve a system of three equations in three variables.
Cramer's Rule is straightforward, following a pattern consistent with
Cramer's Rule for 2 ├Ś 2 matrices. As the order of the matrix increases
to 3 ├Ś 3, however, there are many more calculations required.

When we calculate the determinant to be zero, Cramer's Rule gives no
indication as to whether the system has no solution or an infinite
number of solutions. To find out, we have to perform elimination on the
system.

Consider a 3 ├Ś 3 system of equations.

$$x = \frac{D_{x}}{D},y = \frac{D_{y}}{D},z = \frac{D_{z}}{D},D \neq 0$$

where

If we are writing the determinant D x , we replace the x column with the
constant column. If we are writing the determinant D y , we replace the
y column with the constant column. If we are writing the determinant D z
, we replace the z column with the constant column. Always check the
answer.

::: {#Example_09_08_04 .example}
Find the solution to the given 3 ├Ś 3 system using Cramer's Rule.

$$\begin{matrix}
{x + y - z = 6} \\
{3x - 2y + z = -5} \\
{x + 3y - 2z = 14}
\end{matrix}$$

Use Cramer's Rule.

$$D = \left| \begin{matrix}
1 & 1 & {- 1} \\
3 & {- 2} & 1 \\
1 & 3 & {- 2}
\end{matrix} \right|,D_{x} = \left| \begin{matrix}
6 & 1 & {- 1} \\
{- 5} & {- 2} & 1 \\
14 & 3 & {- 2}
\end{matrix} \right|,D_{y} = \left| \begin{matrix}
1 & 6 & {- 1} \\
3 & {- 5} & 1 \\
1 & 14 & {- 2}
\end{matrix} \right|,D_{z} = \left| \begin{matrix}
1 & 1 & 6 \\
3 & {- 2} & {- 5} \\
1 & 3 & 14
\end{matrix} \right|$$

Then,

$$\begin{array}{l}
{x = \frac{D_{x}}{D} = \frac{- 3}{- 3} = 1} \\
{y = \frac{D_{y}}{D} = \frac{- 9}{- 3} = 3} \\
{z = \frac{D_{z}}{D} = \frac{6}{- 3} = - 2}
\end{array}$$

The solution is ( 1,3,ŌłÆ2 ).
:::

:::: {#fs-id1460684 .note}
::: title
:::

try it feature

Use Cramer's Rule to solve the 3 ├Ś 3 matrix.

$$\begin{array}{r}
{x - 3y + 7z = 13} \\
{x + y + z = 1} \\
{x - 2y + 3z = 4}
\end{array}$$

( ŌłÆ2, 3 5 , 12 5 )
::::

::: {#Example_09_08_05 .example}
Solve the system of equations using Cramer's Rule.

$$\begin{array}{l}
{3x - 2y = 4\quad(1)} \\
{6x - 4y = 0\quad(2)}
\end{array}$$

We begin by finding the determinants D, D x ,and┬Ā D y .

$$D = \left| \begin{matrix}
3 & {- 2} \\
6 & {- 4}
\end{matrix} \right| = 3\left( {- 4} \right) - 6\left( {- 2} \right) = 0$$

We know that a determinant of zero means that either the system has no
solution or it has an infinite number of solutions. To see which one, we
use the process of elimination. Our goal is to eliminate one of the
variables.

Multiply equation (1) by

ŌłÆ2.

Add the result to equation

(

2

)

.

$$\begin{array}{l}
\underset{\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_}{\begin{array}{l}
\begin{array}{l}
 \\
{-6x+4y\mspace{9mu}=-8}
\end{array} \\
{6x-4y=0}
\end{array}} \\
{0 = -8}
\end{array}$$

We obtain the equation 0=ŌłÆ8, which is false. Therefore, the system has
no solution. Graphing the system reveals two parallel lines. See
[\#](#).

<figure id="Figure_09_08_003">

</figure>
:::

::: {#Example_09_08_06 .example}
Solve the system with an infinite number of solutions.

$$\begin{array}{rr}
{x - 2y + 3z = 0} & {(1)} \\
{3x + y - 2z = 0} & {(2)} \\
{2x - 4y + 6z = 0} & {(3)}
\end{array}$$

Let's find the determinant first. Set up a matrix augmented by the first
two columns.

$$\left| {\begin{array}{rrr}
1 & -2 & 3 \\
3 & 1 & -2 \\
2 & -4 & 6
\end{array}\text{~~}\left| {\text{~~}\begin{array}{rr}
1 & -2 \\
3 & 1 \\
2 & -4
\end{array}} \right.} \right|$$

Then,

$$1(1)(6) + \left( {- 2} \right)\left( {- 2} \right)(2) + 3(3)\left( {- 4} \right) - 2(1)(3) - \left( {- 4} \right)\left( {- 2} \right)(1) - 6(3)\left( {- 2} \right) = 0$$

As the determinant equals zero, there is either no solution or an
infinite number of solutions. We have to perform elimination to find
out.

Multiply equation (1) by

ŌłÆ2

and add the result to equation (3):

$$\frac{\begin{array}{r}
{- 2x + 4y - 6z = 0} \\
{2x - 4y + 6z = 0}
\end{array}}{0 = 0}$$

Obtaining an answer of

0

=

0

,

a statement that is always true, means that the system has an infinite
number of solutions. Graphing the system, we can see that two of the
planes are the same and they both intersect the third plane on a line.
See

.

<figure id="Figure_09_08_005">

</figure>
:::

# Understanding Properties of Determinants {#fs-id1651973}

There are many properties of determinants. Listed here are some
properties that may be helpful in calculating the determinant of a
matrix.

:::: {#fs-id1651986 .note}
::: title
Properties of Determinants
:::

a general note label

If the matrix is in upper triangular form, the determinant equals the
product of entries down the main diagonal.

When two rows are interchanged, the determinant changes sign.

If either two rows or two columns are identical, the determinant equals
zero.

If a matrix contains either a row of zeros or a column of zeros, the
determinant equals zero.

The determinant of an inverse matrix

A

ŌłÆ

1

is the reciprocal of the determinant of the matrix

A

.

If any row or column is multiplied by a constant, the determinant is
multiplied by the same factor.
::::

::: {#Example_09_08_07 .example}
Illustrate each of the properties of determinants.

Property 1 states that if the matrix is in upper triangular form, the
determinant is the product of the entries down the main diagonal.

$$A = \left\lbrack \begin{array}{rrr}
1 & 2 & 3 \\
0 & 2 & 1 \\
0 & 0 & {- 1}
\end{array} \right\rbrack$$

Augment A with the first two columns.

$$A = \left\lbrack {\begin{matrix}
1 & 2 & 3 \\
0 & 2 & 1 \\
0 & 0 & {- 1}
\end{matrix}\left| \begin{matrix}
1 \\
0 \\
0
\end{matrix} \right.\begin{matrix}
2 \\
2 \\
0
\end{matrix}} \right\rbrack$$

Then

$$\begin{array}{l}
{\det(A) = 1(2)(-1) + 2(1)(0) + 3(0)(0) - 0(2)(3) - 0(1)(1) + 1(0)(2)} \\
{= -2}
\end{array}$$

Property 2 states that interchanging rows changes the sign. Given

$$\begin{array}{l}
\begin{array}{l}
 \\
{A = \left\lbrack \begin{array}{ll}
-1 & 5 \\
4 & -3
\end{array} \right\rbrack,\mspace{9mu}\det(A) = (-1)(-3) - (4)(5) = 3 - 20 = -17}
\end{array} \\
 \\
{B = \left\lbrack \begin{array}{ll}
4 & {- 3} \\
{- 1} & 5
\end{array} \right\rbrack,\mspace{9mu}\det(B) = (4)(5) - (-1)(-3) = 20 - 3 = 17}
\end{array}$$

Property 3 states that if two rows or two columns are identical, the
determinant equals zero.

$$\begin{array}{l}
{A = \left\lbrack {\begin{array}{lll}
1 & 2 & 2 \\
2 & 2 & 2 \\
-1 & 2 & 2
\end{array}\mspace{9mu}\ \left| {\mspace{9mu}\ \begin{array}{l}
1 \\
2 \\
-1
\end{array}~\begin{array}{l}
2 \\
2 \\
2
\end{array}} \right.} \right\rbrack} \\
 \\
{\det(A) = 1(2)(2) + 2(2)(-1) + 2(2)(2) + 1(2)(2) - 2(2)(1) - 2(2)(2)} \\
{= 4 - 4 + 8 + 4 - 4 - 8 = 0}
\end{array}$$

Property 4 states that if a row or column equals zero, the determinant
equals zero. Thus,

$$A = \begin{bmatrix}
1 & 2 \\
0 & 0
\end{bmatrix},\mspace{9mu}\det(A) = 1(0) - 2(0) = 0$$

Property 5 states that the determinant of an inverse matrix A ŌłÆ1 is the
reciprocal of the determinant A. Thus,

$$\begin{array}{l}
{A = \left\lbrack \begin{array}{ll}
1 & 2 \\
3 & 4
\end{array} \right\rbrack,\det(A) = 1(4) - 3(2) = -2} \\
 \\
{A^{- 1} = \left\lbrack \begin{array}{ll}
{- 2} & 1 \\
\frac{3}{2} & {- \frac{1}{2}}
\end{array} \right\rbrack,\det\left( A^{- 1} \right) = - 2\left( {- \frac{1}{2}} \right) - \left( \frac{3}{2} \right)(1) = - \frac{1}{2}}
\end{array}$$

Property 6 states that if any row or column of a matrix is multiplied by
a constant, the determinant is multiplied by the same factor. Thus,

$$\begin{array}{l}
{A = \left\lbrack \begin{array}{ll}
1 & 2 \\
3 & 4
\end{array} \right\rbrack,\det(A) = 1(4) - 2(3) = -2} \\
 \\
{B = \left\lbrack \begin{array}{ll}
{2(1)} & {2(2)} \\
3 & 4
\end{array} \right\rbrack,\det(B) = 2(4) - 3(4) = -4}
\end{array}$$
:::

::: {#Example_09_08_08 .example}
Find the solution to the given 3 ├Ś 3 system.

$$\begin{array}{ll}
{2x + 4y + 4z = 2} & {(1)} \\
{3x + 7y + 7z = -5} & {(2)} \\
{\ x + 2y + 2z = 4} & {(3)}
\end{array}$$

Using Cramer's Rule, we have

$$D = \left| \begin{matrix}
2 & 4 & 4 \\
3 & 7 & 7 \\
1 & 2 & 2
\end{matrix} \right|$$

Notice that the second and third columns are identical. According to
Property 3, the determinant will be zero, so there is either no solution
or an infinite number of solutions. We have to perform elimination to
find out.

Multiply equation (3) by --2 and add the result to equation (1).

$$\frac{\begin{array}{l}
{- 2x - 4y - 4x = - 8} \\
{\mspace{9mu}\text{~~}2x + 4y + 4z = 2\mspace{9mu}}
\end{array}}{\mspace{9mu} 0 = - 6}$$

Obtaining a statement that is a contradiction means that the system has
no solution.
:::

:::: {#fs-id1422319 .note}
::: title
:::

media feature label

Access these online resources for additional instruction and practice
with Cramer's Rule.

Solve a System of Two Equations Using Cramer\'s Rule

Solve a Systems of Three Equations using Cramer\'s Rule
::::

# Key Concepts {#fs-id1677186}

The determinant for

\[

a

b

c

d

\]

is

a

d

ŌłÆ

b

c

.

See

.

Cramer's Rule replaces a variable column with the constant column.
Solutions are

x

=

D

x

D

,

y

=

D

y

D

.

See

.

To find the determinant of a 3├Ś3 matrix, augment with the first two
columns. Add the three diagonal entries (upper left to lower right) and
subtract the three diagonal entries (lower left to upper right). See

.

To solve a system of three equations in three variables using Cramer's
Rule, replace a variable column with the constant column for each
desired solution:

x

=

D

x

D

,

y

=

D

y

D

,

z

=

D

z

D

.

See

.

Cramer's Rule is also useful for finding the solution of a system of
equations with no solution or infinite solutions. See

and

.

Certain properties of determinants are useful for solving problems. For
example:

If the matrix is in upper triangular form, the determinant equals the
product of entries down the main diagonal.

When two rows are interchanged, the determinant changes sign.

If either two rows or two columns are identical, the determinant equals
zero.

If a matrix contains either a row of zeros or a column of zeros, the
determinant equals zero.

The determinant of an inverse matrix

A

ŌłÆ

1

is the reciprocal of the determinant of the matrix

A

.

If any row or column is multiplied by a constant, the determinant is
multiplied by the same factor. See

and

.

# Section Exercises {#fs-id1408613}

## Verbal {#fs-id1408620}

Explain why we can always evaluate the determinant of a square matrix.

A determinant is the sum and products of the entries in the matrix, so
you can always evaluate that product---even if it does end up being 0.

Examining Cramer's Rule, explain why there is no unique solution to the
system when the determinant of your matrix is 0. For simplicity, use a
2├Ś2 matrix.

Explain what it means in terms of an inverse for a matrix to have a 0
determinant.

The inverse does not exist.

The determinant of 2├Ś2 matrix A is 3. If you switch the rows and
multiply the first row by 6 and the second row by 2, explain how to find
the determinant and provide the answer.

## Algebraic {#fs-id1417224}

For the following exercises, find the determinant.

\| 1 2 3 4 \|

ŌłÆ2

\| ŌłÆ1 2 3 ŌłÆ4 \|

\| 2 ŌłÆ5 ŌłÆ1 6 \|

7

\| ŌłÆ8 4 ŌłÆ1 5 \|

\| 1 0 3 ŌłÆ4 \|

ŌłÆ4

\| 10 20 0 ŌłÆ10 \|

\| 10 0.2 5 0.1 \|

0

\| 6 ŌłÆ3 8 4 \|

\| ŌłÆ2 ŌłÆ3 3.1 4,000 \|

ŌłÆ7,990.7

\| ŌłÆ1.1 0.6 7.2 ŌłÆ0.5 \|

\| ŌłÆ1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 ŌłÆ3 \|

3

\| ŌłÆ1 4 0 0 2 3 0 0 ŌłÆ3 \|

\| 1 0 1 0 1 0 1 0 0 \|

ŌłÆ1

\| 2 ŌłÆ3 1 3 ŌłÆ4 1 ŌłÆ5 6 1 \|

\| ŌłÆ2 1 4 ŌłÆ4 2 ŌłÆ8 2 ŌłÆ8 ŌłÆ3 \|

224

\| 6 ŌłÆ1 2 ŌłÆ4 ŌłÆ3 5 1 9 ŌłÆ1 \|

\| 5 1 ŌłÆ1 2 3 1 3 ŌłÆ6 ŌłÆ3 \|

15

\| 1.1 2 ŌłÆ1 ŌłÆ4 0 0 4.1 ŌłÆ0.4 2.5 \|

\| 2 ŌłÆ1.6 3.1 1.1 3 ŌłÆ8 ŌłÆ9.3 0 2 \|

ŌłÆ17.03

\| ŌłÆ 1 2 1 3 1 4 1 5 ŌłÆ 1 6 1 7 0 0 1 8 \|

For the following exercises, solve the system of linear equations using
Cramer's Rule.

2xŌłÆ3y=ŌłÆ1 4x+5y=9

( 1,1 )

5xŌłÆ4y=2 ŌłÆ4x+7y=6

6xŌłÆ3y=2 ŌłÆ8x+9y=ŌłÆ1

( 1 2 , 1 3 )

2x+6y=12 5xŌłÆ2y=13

4x+3y=23 2xŌłÆy=ŌłÆ1

( 2,5 )

10xŌłÆ6y=2 ŌłÆ5x+8y=ŌłÆ1

4xŌłÆ3y=ŌłÆ3 2x+6y=ŌłÆ4

( ŌłÆ1,ŌłÆ 1 3 )

4xŌłÆ5y=7 ŌłÆ3x+9y=0

4x+10y=180 ŌłÆ3xŌłÆ5y=ŌłÆ105

( 15,12 )

8xŌłÆ2y=ŌłÆ3 ŌłÆ4x+6y=4

For the following exercises, solve the system of linear equations using
Cramer's Rule.

x+2yŌłÆ4z=ŌłÆ1 7x+3y+5z=26 ŌłÆ2xŌłÆ6y+7z=ŌłÆ6

( 1,3,2 )

ŌłÆ5x+2yŌłÆ4z=ŌłÆ47 4xŌłÆ3yŌłÆz=ŌłÆ94 3xŌłÆ3y+2z=94

4x+5yŌłÆz=ŌłÆ7 ŌłÆ2xŌłÆ9y+2z=8 5y+7z=21

( ŌłÆ1,0,3 )

4xŌłÆ3y+4z=10 5xŌłÆ2z=ŌłÆ2 3x+2yŌłÆ5z=ŌłÆ9

4xŌłÆ2y+3z=6 ŌłÆ6x+y=ŌłÆ2 2x+7y+8z=24

( 1 2 ,1,2 )

5x+2yŌłÆz=1 ŌłÆ7xŌłÆ8y+3z=1.5 6xŌłÆ12y+z=7

13xŌłÆ17y+16z=73 ŌłÆ11x+15y+17z=61 46x+10yŌłÆ30z=ŌłÆ18

( 2,1,4 )

ŌłÆ4xŌłÆ3yŌłÆ8z=ŌłÆ7 2xŌłÆ9y+5z=0.5 5xŌłÆ6yŌłÆ5z=ŌłÆ2

4xŌłÆ6y+8z=10 ŌłÆ2x+3yŌłÆ4z=ŌłÆ5 x+y+z=1

Infinite solutions

4xŌłÆ6y+8z=10 ŌłÆ2x+3yŌłÆ4z=ŌłÆ5 12x+18yŌłÆ24z=ŌłÆ30

## Technology {#fs-id1487525}

For the following exercises, use the determinant function on a graphing
utility.

\| 1 0 8 9 0 2 1 0 1 0 3 0 0 2 4 3 \|

24

\| 1 0 2 1 0 ŌłÆ9 1 3 3 0 ŌłÆ2 ŌłÆ1 0 1 1 ŌłÆ2 \|

\| 1 2 1 7 4 0 1 2 100 5 0 0 2 2,000 0 0 0 2 \|

1

\| 1 0 0 0 2 3 0 0 4 5 6 0 7 8 9 0 \|

## Real-World Applications {#fs-id1420602}

For the following exercises, create a system of linear equations to
describe the behavior. Then, calculate the determinant. Will there be a
unique solution? If so, find the unique solution.

Two numbers add up to 56. One number is 20 less than the other.

Yes; 18, 38

Two numbers add up to 104. If you add two times the first number plus
two times the second number, your total is 208

Three numbers add up to 106. The first number is 3 less than the second
number. The third number is 4 more than the first number.

Yes; 33, 36, 37

Three numbers add to 216. The sum of the first two numbers is 112. The
third number is 8 less than the first two numbers combined.

For the following exercises, create a system of linear equations to
describe the behavior. Then, solve the system for all solutions using
Cramer's Rule.

You invest \$10,000 into two accounts, which receive 8% interest and 5%
interest. At the end of a year, you had \$10,710 in your combined
accounts. How much was invested in each account?

\$7,000 in first account, \$3,000 in second account.

You invest \$80,000 into two accounts, \$22,000 in one account, and
\$58,000 in the other account. At the end of one year, assuming simple
interest, you have earned \$2,470 in interest. The second account
receives half a percent less than twice the interest on the first
account. What are the interest rates for your accounts?

A theater needs to know how many adult tickets and children tickets were
sold out of the 1,200 total tickets. If children's tickets are \$5.95,
adult tickets are \$11.15, and the total amount of revenue was \$12,756,
how many children's tickets and adult tickets were sold?

120 children, 1,080 adult

A concert venue sells single tickets for \$40 each and couple's tickets
for \$65. If the total revenue was \$18,090 and the 321 tickets were
sold, how many single tickets and how many couple's tickets were sold?

You decide to paint your kitchen green. You create the color of paint by
mixing yellow and blue paints. You cannot remember how many gallons of
each color went into your mix, but you know there were 10 gal total.
Additionally, you kept your receipt, and know the total amount spent was
\$29.50. If each gallon of yellow costs \$2.59, and each gallon of blue
costs \$3.19, how many gallons of each color go into your green mix?

4 gal yellow, 6 gal blue

You sold two types of scarves at a farmers' market and would like to
know which one was more popular. The total number of scarves sold was
56, the yellow scarf cost \$10, and the purple scarf cost \$11. If you
had total revenue of \$583, how many yellow scarves and how many purple
scarves were sold?

Your garden produced two types of tomatoes, one green and one red. The
red weigh 10 oz, and the green weigh 4 oz. You have 30 tomatoes, and a
total weight of 13 lb, 14 oz. How many of each type of tomato do you
have?

13 green tomatoes, 17 red tomatoes

At a market, the three most popular vegetables make up 53% of vegetable
sales. Corn has 4% higher sales than broccoli, which has 5% more sales
than onions. What percentage does each vegetable have in the market
share?

At the same market, the three most popular fruits make up 37% of the
total fruit sold. Strawberries sell twice as much as oranges, and kiwis
sell one more percentage point than oranges. For each fruit, find the
percentage of total fruit sold.

Strawberries 18%, oranges 9%, kiwi 10%

Three artists performed at a concert venue. The first one charged \$15
per ticket, the second artist charged \$45 per ticket, and the final one
charged \$22 per ticket. There were 510 tickets sold, for a total of
\$12,700. If the first band had 40 more audience members than the second
band, how many tickets were sold for each band?

A movie theatre sold tickets to three movies. The tickets to the first
movie were \$5, the tickets to the second movie were \$11, and the third
movie was \$12. 100 tickets were sold to the first movie. The total
number of tickets sold was 642, for a total revenue of \$6,774. How many
tickets for each movie were sold?

100 for movie 1, 230 for movie 2, 312 for movie 3

For the following exercises, use this scenario: A health-conscious
company decides to make a trail mix out of almonds, dried cranberries,
and chocolate-covered cashews. The nutritional information for these
items is shown in [\#](#).

                       Fat (g)   Protein (g)   Carbohydrates (g)
  -------------------- --------- ------------- -------------------
  *Almonds (10)*       6         2             3
  *Cranberries (10)*   0.02      0             8
  *Cashews (10)*       7         3.5           5.5

For the special "low-carb"trail mix, there are 1,000 pieces of mix. The
total number of carbohydrates is 425 g, and the total amount of fat is
570.2 g. If there are 200 more pieces of cashews than cranberries, how
many of each item is in the trail mix?

For the "hiking" mix, there are 1,000 pieces in the mix, containing
390.8 g of fat, and 165 g of protein. If there is the same amount of
almonds as cashews, how many of each item is in the trail mix?

300 almonds, 400 cranberries, 300 cashews

For the "energy-booster" mix, there are 1,000 pieces in the mix,
containing 145 g of protein and 625 g of carbohydrates. If the number of
almonds and cashews summed together is equivalent to the amount of
cranberries, how many of each item is in the trail mix?

# Review Exercises {#fs-id1647240}

## [Systems of Linear Equations: Two Variables](#) {#fs-id2876816}

For the following exercises, determine whether the ordered pair is a
solution to the system of equations.

3xŌłÆy=4 x+4y=ŌłÆ3 and (ŌłÆ1,1)

No

6xŌłÆ2y=24 ŌłÆ3x+3y=18 and (9,15)

For the following exercises, use substitution to solve the system of
equations.

10x+5y=ŌłÆ5 3xŌłÆ2y=ŌłÆ12

( ŌłÆ2,3 )

4 7 x+ 1 5 y= 43 70 5 6 xŌłÆ 1 3 y=ŌłÆ 2 3

5x+6y=14 4x+8y=8

( 4,ŌłÆ1 )

For the following exercises, use addition to solve the system of
equations.

3x+2y=ŌłÆ7 2x+4y=6

3x+4y=2 9x+12y=3

No solutions exist.

8x+4y=2 6xŌłÆ5y=0.7

For the following exercises, write a system of equations to solve each
problem. Solve the system of equations.

A factory has a cost of production C(x)=150x+15,000 and a revenue
function R(x)=200x. What is the break-even point?

(300,60,000)

A performer charges C(x)=50x+10,000, where x is the total number of
attendees at a show. The venue charges \$75 per ticket. After how many
people buy tickets does the venue break even, and what is the value of
the total tickets sold at that point?

## [Systems of Linear Equations: Three Variables](#) {#fs-id2266991}

For the following exercises, solve the system of three equations using
substitution or addition.

0.5xŌłÆ0.5y=10 ŌłÆ0.2y+0.2x=4 0.1x+0.1z=2

Infinite solutions

5x+3yŌłÆz=5 3xŌłÆ2y+4z=13 4x+3y+5z=22

x+y+z=1 2x+2y+2z=1 3x+3y=2

No solutions exist.

2xŌłÆ3y+z=ŌłÆ1 x+y+z=ŌłÆ4 4x+2yŌłÆ3z=33

3x+2yŌłÆz=ŌłÆ10 xŌłÆy+2z=7 ŌłÆx+3y+z=ŌłÆ2

( ŌłÆ1,ŌłÆ2,3 )

3x+4z=ŌłÆ11 xŌłÆ2y=5 4yŌłÆz=ŌłÆ10

2xŌłÆ3y+z=0 2x+4yŌłÆ3z=0 6xŌłÆ2yŌłÆz=0

( x, 8x 5 , 14x 5 )

6xŌłÆ4yŌłÆ2z=2 3x+2yŌłÆ5z=4 6yŌłÆ7z=5

For the following exercises, write a system of equations to solve each
problem. Solve the system of equations.

Three odd numbers sum up to 61. The smaller is one-third the larger and
the middle number is 16 less than the larger. What are the three
numbers?

11, 17, 33

A local theatre sells out for their show. They sell all 500 tickets for
a total purse of \$8,070.00. The tickets were priced at \$15 for
students, \$12 for children, and \$18 for adults. If the band sold three
times as many adult tickets as children's tickets, how many of each type
was sold?

## [Systems of Nonlinear Equations and Inequalities: Two Variables](#) {#fs-id1801019}

For the following exercises, solve the system of nonlinear equations.

y= x 2 ŌłÆ7 y=5xŌłÆ13

( 2,ŌłÆ3 ),( 3,2 )

y= x 2 ŌłÆ4 y=5x+10

x 2 + y 2 =16 y=xŌłÆ8

No solution

x 2 + y 2 =25 y= x 2 +5

x 2 + y 2 =4 yŌłÆ x 2 =3

No solution

For the following exercises, graph the inequality.

y\> x 2 ŌłÆ1

1 4 x 2 + y 2 \<4

For the following exercises, graph the system of inequalities.

x 2 + y 2 +2x\<3 y\>ŌłÆ x 2 ŌłÆ3

x 2 ŌłÆ2x+ y 2 ŌłÆ4x\<4 y\<ŌłÆx+4

x 2 + y 2 \<1 y 2 \<x

## [Partial Fractions](#) {#fs-id2867422}

For the following exercises, decompose into partial fractions.

ŌłÆ2x+6 x 2 +3x+2

2 x+2 , ŌłÆ4 x+1

10x+2 4 x 2 +4x+1

7x+20 x 2 +10x+25

7 x+5 , ŌłÆ15 (x+5) 2

xŌłÆ18 x 2 ŌłÆ12x+36

ŌłÆ x 2 +36x+70 x 3 ŌłÆ125

3 xŌłÆ5 , ŌłÆ4x+1 x 2 +5x+25

ŌłÆ5 x 2 +6xŌłÆ2 x 3 +27

x 3 ŌłÆ4 x 2 +3x+11 ( x 2 ŌłÆ2) 2

xŌłÆ4 ( x 2 ŌłÆ2) , 5x+3 ( x 2 ŌłÆ2) 2

4 x 4 ŌłÆ2 x 3 +22 x 2 ŌłÆ6x+48 x ( x 2 +4) 2

## [Matrices and Matrix Operations](#) {#fs-id2925191}

For the following exercises, perform the requested operations on the
given matrices.

$$A = \left\lbrack \begin{array}{rr}
4 & {- 2} \\
1 & 3
\end{array} \right\rbrack,B = \left\lbrack \begin{array}{rrr}
6 & 7 & {- 3} \\
11 & {- 2} & 4
\end{array} \right\rbrack,C = \left\lbrack \begin{array}{r}
\begin{array}{rr}
6 & 7 \\
11 & {- 2}
\end{array} \\
\begin{array}{rr}
14 & 0
\end{array}
\end{array} \right\rbrack,D = \left\lbrack \begin{array}{rrr}
1 & {- 4} & 9 \\
10 & 5 & {- 7} \\
2 & 8 & 5
\end{array} \right\rbrack,E = \left\lbrack \begin{array}{rrr}
7 & {- 14} & 3 \\
2 & {- 1} & 3 \\
0 & 1 & 9
\end{array} \right\rbrack$$

ŌłÆ4A

\[ ŌłÆ16 8 ŌłÆ4 ŌłÆ12 \]

10DŌłÆ6E

B+C

undefined; dimensions do not match

AB

BA

undefined; inner dimensions do not match

BC

CB

\[ 113 28 10 44 81 ŌłÆ41 84 98 ŌłÆ42 \]

DE

ED

\[ ŌłÆ127 ŌłÆ74 176 ŌłÆ2 11 40 28 77 38 \]

EC

CE

undefined; inner dimensions do not match

A 3

## [Solving Systems with Gaussian Elimination](#) {#fs-id2652002}

For the following exercises, write the system of linear equations from
the augmented matrix. Indicate whether there will be a unique solution.

\[ 1 0 ŌłÆ3 0 1 2 0 0 0 \| 7 ŌłÆ5 0 \]

xŌłÆ3z=7 y+2z=ŌłÆ5 with infinite solutions

\[ 1 0 5 0 1 ŌłÆ2 0 0 0 \| ŌłÆ9 4 3 \]

For the following exercises, write the augmented matrix from the system
of linear equations.

ŌłÆ2x+2y+z=7 2xŌłÆ8y+5z=0 19xŌłÆ10y+22z=3

\[ ŌłÆ2 2 1 2 ŌłÆ8 5 19 ŌłÆ10 22 \| 7 0 3 \]

4x+2yŌłÆ3z=14 ŌłÆ12x+3y+z=100 9xŌłÆ6y+2z=31

x+3z=12 ŌłÆx+4y=0 y+2z=ŌłÆ7

\[ 1 0 3 ŌłÆ1 4 0 0 1 2 \| 12 0 ŌłÆ7 \]

For the following exercises, solve the system of linear equations using
Gaussian elimination.

3xŌłÆ4y=ŌłÆ7 ŌłÆ6x+8y=14

3xŌłÆ4y=1 ŌłÆ6x+8y=6

No solutions exist.

ŌłÆ1.1xŌłÆ2.3y=6.2 ŌłÆ5.2xŌłÆ4.1y=4.3

2x+3y+2z=1 ŌłÆ4xŌłÆ6yŌłÆ4z=ŌłÆ2 10x+15y+10z=0

No solutions exist.

ŌłÆx+2yŌłÆ4z=8 3y+8z=ŌłÆ4 ŌłÆ7x+y+2z=1

## [Solving Systems with Inverses](#) {#fs-id1766016}

For the following exercises, find the inverse of the matrix.

\[ ŌłÆ0.2 1.4 1.2 ŌłÆ0.4 \]

1 8 \[ 2 7 6 1 \]

\[ 1 2 ŌłÆ 1 2 ŌłÆ 1 4 3 4 \]

\[ 12 9 ŌłÆ6 ŌłÆ1 3 2 ŌłÆ4 ŌłÆ3 2 \]

No inverse exists.

\[ 2 1 3 1 2 3 3 2 1 \]

For the following exercises, find the solutions by computing the inverse
of the matrix.

0.3xŌłÆ0.1y=ŌłÆ10 ŌłÆ0.1x+0.3y=14

( ŌłÆ20,40 )

0.4xŌłÆ0.2y=ŌłÆ0.6 ŌłÆ0.1x+0.05y=0.3

4x+3yŌłÆ3z=ŌłÆ4.3 5xŌłÆ4yŌłÆz=ŌłÆ6.1 x+z=ŌłÆ0.7

( ŌłÆ1,0.2,0.3 )

ŌłÆ2xŌłÆ3y+2z=3 ŌłÆx+2y+4z=ŌłÆ5 ŌłÆ2y+5z=ŌłÆ3

For the following exercises, write a system of equations to solve each
problem. Solve the system of equations.

Students were asked to bring their favorite fruit to class. 90% of the
fruits consisted of banana, apple, and oranges. If oranges were half as
popular as bananas and apples were 5% more popular than bananas, what
are the percentages of each individual fruit?

17% oranges, 34% bananas, 39% apples

A school club held a bake sale to raise money and sold brownies and
chocolate chip cookies. They priced the brownies at \$2 and the
chocolate chip cookies at \$1. They raised \$250 and sold 175 items. How
many brownies and how many cookies were sold?

## [Solving Systems with Cramer\'s Rule](#) {#fs-id2974900}

For the following exercises, find the determinant.

\| 100 0 0 0 \|

0

\| 0.2 ŌłÆ0.6 0.7 ŌłÆ1.1 \|

\| ŌłÆ1 4 3 0 2 3 0 0 ŌłÆ3 \|

6

\| 2 0 0 0 2 0 0 0 2 \|

For the following exercises, use Cramer's Rule to solve the linear
systems of equations.

4xŌłÆ2y=23 ŌłÆ5xŌłÆ10y=ŌłÆ35

( 6, 1 2 )

0.2xŌłÆ0.1y=0 ŌłÆ0.3x+0.3y=2.5

ŌłÆ0.5x+0.1y=0.3 ŌłÆ0.25x+0.05y=0.15

(*x*, 5*x* + 3)

x+6y+3z=4 2x+y+2z=3 3xŌłÆ2y+z=0

4xŌłÆ3y+5z=ŌłÆ 5 2 7xŌłÆ9yŌłÆ3z= 3 2 xŌłÆ5yŌłÆ5z= 5 2

( 0,0,ŌłÆ 1 2 )

3 10 xŌłÆ 1 5 yŌłÆ 3 10 z=ŌłÆ 1 50 1 10 xŌłÆ 1 10 yŌłÆ 1 2 z=ŌłÆ 9 50 2 5 xŌłÆ 1 2 yŌłÆ
3 5 z=ŌłÆ 1 5

# Practice Test {#fs-id1459744}

Is the following ordered pair a solution to the system of equations?

ŌłÆ5xŌłÆy=12 x+4y=9 with (ŌłÆ3,3)

Yes

For the following exercises, solve the systems of linear and nonlinear
equations using substitution or elimination. Indicate if no solution
exists.

1 2 xŌłÆ 1 3 y=4 3 2 xŌłÆy=0

ŌłÆ 1 2 xŌłÆ4y=4 2x+16y=2

No solutions exist.

5xŌłÆy=1 ŌłÆ10x+2y=ŌłÆ2

4xŌłÆ6yŌłÆ2z= 1 10 xŌłÆ7y+5z=ŌłÆ 1 4 3x+6yŌłÆ9z= 6 5

1 20 ( 10,5,4 )

x+z=20 x+y+z=20 x+2y+z=10

5xŌłÆ4yŌłÆ3z=0 2x+y+2z=0 xŌłÆ6yŌłÆ7z=0

( x, 16x 5 ŌłÆ 13x 5 )

y= x 2 +2xŌłÆ3 y=xŌłÆ1

y 2 + x 2 =25 y 2 ŌłÆ2 x 2 =1

(ŌłÆ2 2 ,ŌłÆ 17 ),( ŌłÆ2 2 , 17 ),( 2 2 ,ŌłÆ 17 ),( 2 2 , 17 )

For the following exercises, graph the following inequalities.

y\< x 2 +9

x 2 + y 2 \>4 y\< x 2 +1

For the following exercises, write the partial fraction decomposition.

ŌłÆ8xŌłÆ30 x 2 +10x+25

13x+2 (3x+1) 2

5 3x+1 ŌłÆ 2x+3 (3x+1) 2

x 4 ŌłÆ x 3 +2xŌłÆ1 x ( x 2 +1) 2

For the following exercises, perform the given matrix operations.

5\[ 4 9 ŌłÆ2 3 \]+ 1 2 \[ ŌłÆ6 12 4 ŌłÆ8 \]

\[ 17 51 ŌłÆ8 11 \]

\[ 1 4 ŌłÆ7 ŌłÆ2 9 5 12 0 ŌłÆ4 \]\[ 3 ŌłÆ4 1 3 5 10 \]

\[ 1 2 1 3 1 4 1 5 \] ŌłÆ1

\[ 12 ŌłÆ20 ŌłÆ15 30 \]

det\| 0 0 400 4,000 \|

det\| 1 2 ŌłÆ 1 2 0 ŌłÆ 1 2 0 1 2 0 1 2 0 \|

ŌłÆ 1 8

If det(A)=ŌłÆ6, what would be the determinant if you switched rows 1 and
3, multiplied the second row by 12, and took the inverse?

Rewrite the system of linear equations as an augmented matrix.

$$\begin{array}{l}
{14x - 2y + 13z = 140} \\
{- 2x + 3y - 6z = - 1} \\
{x - 5y + 12z = 11}
\end{array}$$

\[ 14 ŌłÆ2 13 ŌłÆ2 3 ŌłÆ6 1 ŌłÆ5 12 \| 140 ŌłÆ1 11 \]

Rewrite the augmented matrix as a system of linear equations.

$$\left\lbrack {\left. \begin{array}{rrr}
1 & 0 & 3 \\
{- 2} & 4 & 9 \\
{- 6} & 1 & 2
\end{array} \right|\begin{array}{r}
12 \\
{- 5} \\
8
\end{array}} \right\rbrack$$

For the following exercises, use Gaussian elimination to solve the
systems of equations.

xŌłÆ6y=4 2xŌłÆ12y=0

No solutions exist.

2x+y+z=ŌłÆ3 xŌłÆ2y+3z=6 xŌłÆyŌłÆz=6

For the following exercises, use the inverse of a matrix to solve the
systems of equations.

4xŌłÆ5y=ŌłÆ50 ŌłÆx+2y=80

( 100,90 )

1 100 xŌłÆ 3 100 y+ 1 20 z=ŌłÆ49 3 100 xŌłÆ 7 100 yŌłÆ 1 100 z=13 9 100 xŌłÆ 9 100
yŌłÆ 9 100 z=99

For the following exercises, use Cramer's Rule to solve the systems of
equations.

200xŌłÆ300y=2 400x+715y=4

( 1 100 ,0 )

0.1x+0.1yŌłÆ0.1z=ŌłÆ1.2 0.1xŌłÆ0.2y+0.4z=ŌłÆ1.2 0.5xŌłÆ0.3y+0.8z=ŌłÆ5.9

For the following exercises, solve using a system of linear equations.

A factory producing cell phones has the following cost and revenue
functions: C(x)= x 2 +75x+2,688 and R(x)= x 2 +160x. What is the range
of cell phones they should produce each day so there is profit? Round to
the nearest number that generates profit.

32 or more cell phones per day

A small fair charges \$1.50 for students, \$1 for children, and \$2 for
adults. In one day, three times as many children as adults attended. A
total of 800 tickets were sold for a total revenue of \$1,050. How many
of each type of ticket was sold?

# 

Cramer's Rule

a method for solving systems of equations that have the same number of
equations as variables using determinants

determinant

a number calculated using the entries of a square matrix that determines
such information as whether there is a solution to a system of equations
