m51270

> In this section, you will:
>
> Represent a linear function.
>
> Determine whether a linear function is increasing, decreasing, or
> constant.
>
> Interpret slope as a rate of change.
>
> Write and interpret an equation for a linear function.
>
> Graph linear functions.
>
> Determine whether lines are parallel or perpendicular.
>
> Write the equation of a line parallel or perpendicular to a given
> line.

f48a9644-4329-4387-9b38-4ac039f12570

#  {#eip-841}

## Learning Objectives {#eip-744}

Find the slope of a line (IA 3.2.1)

Find an equation of the line given two points (IA 3.3.3)

## Objective 1: Find the slope of a line. (IA 3.2.1) {#eip-978}

Linear functions are a specific type of function that can be used to
model many real-world applications, such as the growth of a plant,
earned salary, the distance a train travels over time, or the costs to
start a new business. In this section, we will explore linear functions,
their graphs, and how to find them using data points.

### Linear Function {#eip-idm203900480}

A linear function is a function whose graph is a line. Linear functions
can be written in the slope-intercept form of a line

f(x)=mx+b

where b is the initial or starting value of the function (when input,
x=0), and m is the constant rate of change, or slope of the function.
The y -intercept is at ( 0,b ).

m=slope= change in outputchange in input=∆y∆x= y2-y1x2-x1 =
f(x2)-f(x1)x2-x1=riserun

When interpreting slope, it will be important to consider the units of
measurement. Make sure to always attach these units to both the
numerator and denominator when they are provided to you.

:::: {#eip-731 .note}
::: title
Quick Guide to Slopes of Lines
:::
::::

::: {#eip-996 .example}
Find the slope of the line shown.

Locate two points on the graph whose coordinates are integers. Label the
coordinates of these points. (0, 1)  =(x1,y1) (5, -2) =(x2,y2) It may
help to visualize this change as m=riserun Count the rise between the
points. Since the line goes down, the slope is negative. Then count the
run, or horizontal change. Using the slope formula:
m=riserun=y2-y1x2-x1=-2-15-0=-35
:::

### Practice Makes Perfect {#eip-51}

Find the slope of the line.

Find the slope of the line below:

Find the slope of the following line: y=3

Find the slope of the following line: x=-2

Find the slope of the following line: y=-5x-6

Find the slope of the following line: 2x-4y=5

Use the slope formula to find the slope of the line between the
following pair of points. (-2,4),(3,-1)

Use the slope formula to find the slope of the linear function
satisfying the condition below. f(-2)=-1,f(6)=5

## Objective 2: Find an equation of the line given two points. (IA 3.3.3) {#eip-816}

### Find an Equation of the Line Given Two Points {#eip-idm227500976}

When data is collected, a linear model can be created from two data
points. In the next example we'll see how to find an equation of a line
when two points are given by following the steps below.

:::: {#eip-952 .note}
::: title
:::

Find the slope using the given points.

Choose one point and label its coordinates

(

x

1

,

y

1

)

.

Plug

m

,

x

1

and

y

1

into point-slope form,

y

\-

y

1

=

m

(

x

\-

x

1

)

.

Write the equation in slope-intercept form,

y

=

m

x

\+

b

.
::::

::: {#eip-407 .example}
Find an equation of the line given two points.

Find the equation of a line containing the points (−4, −3) and (1, −5)

Find the slope of the line using the given points.

m

=

\-

5

\-

(

\-

3

)

1

\-

(

\-

4

)

=

\-

5

\+

3

1

\+

4

=

\-

2

5

Choose one point and label these coordinates

(

−

4

,

−

3

)

=

x

1

,

y

1

Plug

m

,

x

2

and

y

2

into point-slope for,

y

\-

y

1

=

m

(

x

\-

x

1

)

.

y

\-

(

\-

3

)

=

\-

2

5

(

x

\-

(

\-

4

)

)

y

\+

3

=

\-

2

5

(

x

\+

4

)

Write the equation in slope-intercept form,

y

=

m

x

\+

b

.

y

\+

3

=

\-

2

5

x

\-

8

5

y

=

\-

2

5

x

\-

8

5

\-

3

y

=

\-

2

5

x

\-

8

5

\-

15

5

y

=

\-

2

5

x

\-

23

5
:::

### Practice Makes Perfect {#eip-534}

Find an equation of the line given two points.

Find the equation of a line containing the given points. Write the
equation in slope-intercept form. (4,3) and (8,1)

Find the equation of a line containing the given points. Write the
equation in slope-intercept form. (-5,-3) and (4,-6)

Find the equation of a line containing the given points. Write the
equation in slope-intercept form. f(-2)=8,f(4)=6

Derek notices the amount he receives in tips each night is a linear
function of the number of tables he waits on. On Friday evening he waits
on 22 tables and receives \$87 in tips, and on Tuesday evening he waits
on 18 tables and receives \$73 in tips. ⓐ Record the information given
above as two data points. ⓑ Find the slope of this linear function in
terms of \$table . ⓒ Write a linear function S(t) that will let him
estimate the amount in \$ in tips he will receive as a function of
tables, t, waited on.

Complete the following:

  *Verbal Description*             *Formula*
  -------------------------------- -----------
  Slope between two points         
  Point-slope form of a line       
  Slope-intercept form of a line   

<figure id="CNX_Precalc_Figure_02_01_011">

</figure>

Just as with the growth of a bamboo plant, there are many situations
that involve constant change over time. Consider, for example, the first
commercial maglev train in the world, the Shanghai MagLev Train
([\#](#)). It carries passengers comfortably for a 30-kilometer trip
from the airport to the subway station in only eight minutes[^1].

Suppose a maglev train travels a long distance, and maintains a constant
speed of 83 meters per second for a period of time once it is 250 meters
from the station. How can we analyze the train's distance from the
station as a function of time? In this section, we will investigate a
kind of function that is useful for this purpose, and use it to
investigate real-world situations such as the train's distance from the
station at a given point in time.

# Representing Linear Functions {#fs-id2374595}

The function describing the train's motion is a linear function, which
is defined as a function with a constant rate of change. This is a
polynomial of degree 1. There are several ways to represent a linear
function, including word form, function notation, tabular form, and
graphical form. We will describe the train's motion as a function using
each method.

## Representing a Linear Function in Word Form {#fs-id2052037}

Let's begin by describing the linear function in words. For the train
problem we just considered, the following word sentence may be used to
describe the function relationship.

The train's distance from the station is a function of the time during
which the train moves at a constant speed plus its original distance
from the station when it began moving at constant speed.

The speed is the rate of change. Recall that a rate of change is a
measure of how quickly the dependent variable changes with respect to
the independent variable. The rate of change for this example is
constant, which means that it is the same for each input value. As the
time (input) increases by 1 second, the corresponding distance (output)
increases by 83 meters. The train began moving at this constant speed at
a distance of 250 meters from the station.

## Representing a Linear Function in Function Notation {#fs-id2216588}

Another approach to representing linear functions is by using function
notation. One example of function notation is an equation written in the
slope-intercept form of a line, where x is the input value, m is the
rate of change, and b is the initial value of the dependent variable.

$$\begin{array}{ll}
{\text{Equation~form}\qquad} & {y = mx + b} \\
{\text{Function~notation}\qquad} & {f(x) = mx + b}
\end{array}$$

In the example of the train, we might use the notation D(t) where the
total distance D is a function of the time t. The rate, m, is 83 meters
per second. The initial value of the dependent variable b is the
original distance from the station, 250 meters. We can write a
generalized equation to represent the motion of the train.

$$D(t) = 83t + 250$$

## Representing a Linear Function in Tabular Form {#fs-id1349346}

A third method of representing a linear function is through the use of a
table. The relationship between the distance from the station and the
time is represented in [\#](#). From the table, we can see that the
distance changes by 83 meters for every 1 second increase in time.

<figure id="CNX_Precalc_Figure_02_01_015">

</figure>

:::: {#fs-id1550000 .note}
::: title
:::

Q&A

*Can the input in the previous example be any real number?*

*No. The input represents time so while nonnegative rational and
irrational numbers are possible, negative real numbers are not possible
for this example. The input consists of non-negative real numbers.*
::::

## Representing a Linear Function in Graphical Form {#fs-id1726229}

Another way to represent linear functions is visually, using a graph. We
can use the function relationship from above, D(t)=83t+250, to draw a
graph as represented in [\#](#). Notice the graph is a line*.* When we
plot a linear function, the graph is always a line.

The rate of change, which is constant, determines the slant, or slope of
the line. The point at which the input value is zero is the vertical
intercept, or *y*-intercept, of the line. We can see from the graph that
the *y*-intercept in the train example we just saw is (0,250) and
represents the distance of the train from the station when it began
moving at a constant speed.

<figure id="CNX_Precalc_Figure_02_01_012">

</figure>

Notice that the graph of the train example is restricted, but this is
not always the case. Consider the graph of the line f(x)=2x+1. Ask
yourself what numbers can be input to the function. In other words, what
is the domain of the function? The domain is comprised of all real
numbers because any number may be doubled, and then have one added to
the product.

:::: {#fs-id1499603 .note}
::: title
Linear Function
:::

A linear function is a function whose graph is a line. Linear functions
can be written in the slope-intercept form of a line

$$f(x) = mx + b$$

where b is the initial or starting value of the function (when input,
x=0 ), and m is the constant rate of change, or slope of the function.
The *y*-intercept is at (0,b).
::::

::: {#Example_04_01_01 .example}
The pressure, P, in pounds per square inch (PSI) on the diver in [\#](#)
depends upon her depth below the water surface, d, in feet. This
relationship may be modeled by the equation, P(d)=0.434d+14.696. Restate
this function in words.

<figure id="CNX_Precalc_Figure_02_01_003">

</figure>

To restate the function in words, we need to describe each part of the
equation. The pressure as a function of depth equals four hundred
thirty-four thousandths times depth plus fourteen and six hundred
ninety-six thousandths.

The initial value, 14.696, is the pressure in PSI on the diver at a
depth of 0 feet, which is the surface of the water. The rate of change,
or slope, is 0.434 PSI per foot. This tells us that the pressure on the
diver increases 0.434 PSI for each foot her depth increases.
:::

# Determining Whether a Linear Function Is Increasing, Decreasing, or Constant {#fs-id1630015}

The linear functions we used in the two previous examples increased over
time, but not every linear function does. A linear function may be
increasing, decreasing, or constant. For an increasing function, as with
the train example, the output values increase as the input values
increase. The graph of an increasing function has a positive slope. A
line with a positive slope slants upward from left to right as in
[\#](#)*(a)*. For a decreasing function, the slope is negative. The
output values decrease as the input values increase. A line with a
negative slope slants downward from left to right as in [\#](#)*(b)*. If
the function is constant, the output values are the same for all input
values so the slope is zero. A line with a slope of zero is horizontal
as in [\#](#)*(c)*.

<figure id="CNX_Precalc_Figure_02_01_004abc">

</figure>

:::: {#fs-id2166875 .note}
::: title
Increasing and Decreasing Functions
:::

The slope determines if the function is an increasing linear function, a
decreasing linear function, or a constant function.

f

(

x

)

=

m

x

\+

b

is an increasing function if

m

\>

0\.

f

(

x

)

=

m

x

\+

b

is a decreasing function if

m

\<

0\.

f

(

x

)

=

m

x

\+

b

is a constant function if

m

=

0\.
::::

::: {#Example_04_01_02 .example}
Studies from the early 2010s indicated that teens sent about 60 texts a
day, while more recent data indicates much higher messaging rates among
all users, particularly considering the various apps with which people
can communicate.[^2]. For each of the following scenarios, find the
linear function that describes the relationship between the input value
and the output value. Then, determine whether the graph of the function
is increasing, decreasing, or constant.

ⓐ

The total number of texts a teen sends is considered a function of time
in days. The input is the number of days, and output is the total number
of texts sent.

ⓑ

A person has a limit of 500 texts per month in their data plan. The
input is the number of days, and output is the total number of texts
remaining for the month.

ⓒ

A person has an unlimited number of texts in their data plan for a cost
of \$50 per month. The input is the number of days, and output is the
total cost of texting each month.

Analyze each function.

ⓐ

The function can be represented as

f

(

x

)

=

60

x

where

x

is the number of days. The slope, 60, is positive so the function is
increasing. This makes sense because the total number of texts increases
with each day.

ⓑ

The function can be represented as

f

(

x

)

=

500

−

60

x

where

x

is the number of days. In this case, the slope is negative so the
function is decreasing. This makes sense because the number of texts
remaining decreases each day and this function represents the number of
texts remaining in the data plan after

x

days.

ⓒ

The cost function can be represented as

f

(

x

)

=

50

because the number of days does not affect the total cost. The slope is
0 so the function is constant.
:::

# Interpreting Slope as a Rate of Change {#fs-id2407166}

In the examples we have seen so far, the slope was provided to us.
However, we often need to calculate the slope given input and output
values. Recall that given two values for the input, x 1 and x 2 , and
two corresponding values for the output, y 1 and y 2 ---which can be
represented by a set of points, ( x 1 ,  y 1 ) and ( x 2 ,  y 2 ) ---we
can calculate the slope m.

$$m = \frac{\text{change~in~output~(rise)}}{\text{change~in~input~(run)}} = \frac{\Delta y}{\Delta x} = \frac{y_{2} - y_{1}}{x_{2} - x_{1}}$$

Note that in function notation we can obtain two corresponding values
for the output y 1 and y 2 for the function f, y 1 =f( x 1 ) and y 2 =f(
x 2 ), so we could equivalently write

$$m = \frac{f\left( x_{2} \right)–f\left( x_{1} \right)}{x_{2}–x_{1}}$$

[\#](#) indicates how the slope of the line between the points, ( x 1 ,
y 1 ) and ( x 2 , y 2 ), is calculated. Recall that the slope measures
steepness, or slant. The greater the absolute value of the slope, the
steeper the slant is.

<figure id="CNX_Precalc_Figure_02_01_005">

</figure>

:::: {#fs-id1535866 .note}
::: title
:::

Q&A

*Are the units for slope always* units for the output
units for the input ?

*Yes. Think of the units as the change of output value for each unit of
change in input value. An example of slope could be miles per hour or
dollars per day. Notice the units appear as a ratio of units for the
output per units for the input.*
::::

:::: {#fs-id1427746 .note}
::: title
Calculate Slope
:::

The slope, or rate of change, of a function m can be calculated
according to the following:

$$m = \frac{\text{change~in~output~(rise)}}{\text{change~in~input~(run)}} = \frac{\Delta y}{\Delta x} = \frac{y_{2} - y_{1}}{x_{2} - x_{1}}$$

where x 1 and x 2 are input values, y 1 and y 2 are output values.
::::

:::: {#fs-id1673258 .note}
::: title
:::

How To

*Given two points from a linear function, calculate and interpret the
slope.*

Determine the units for output and input values.

Calculate the change of output values and change of input values.

Interpret the slope as the change in output values per unit of the input
value.
::::

::: {#Example_04_01_03 .example}
If f(x) is a linear function, and (3,−2) and (8,1) are points on the
line, find the slope. Is this function increasing or decreasing?

The coordinate pairs are (3,−2) and (8,1). To find the rate of change,
we divide the change in output by the change in input.

$$m = \frac{\text{change~in~output}}{\text{change~in~input}} = \frac{1 - (-2)}{8 - 3} = \frac{3}{5}$$

We could also write the slope as m=0.6. The function is increasing
because m\>0.

As noted earlier, the order in which we write the points does not matter
when we compute the slope of the line as long as the first output value,
or *y*-coordinate, used corresponds with the first input value, or
*x*-coordinate, used. Note that if we had reversed them, we would have
obtained the same slope.

$$m = \frac{(-2) - (1)}{3 - 8} = \frac{- 3}{- 5} = \frac{3}{5}$$
:::

:::: {#fs-id2197280 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

If f(x) is a linear function, and (2,3) and (0,4) are points on the
line, find the slope. Is this function increasing or decreasing?

m= 4−3 0−2 = 1 −2 =− 1 2 ; decreasing because m\<0.
::::

::: {#Example_04_01_04 .example}
The population of a city increased from 23,400 to 27,800 between 2008
and 2012. Find the change of population per year if we assume the change
was constant from 2008 to 2012.

The rate of change relates the change in population to the change in
time. The population increased by 27,800−23,400=4400 people over the
four-year time interval. To find the rate of change, divide the change
in the number of people by the number of years.

$$\frac{\text{4,400~people}}{\text{4~years}} = \text{1,100~}\frac{\text{people}}{\text{year}}$$

So the population increased by 1,100 people per year.

Because we are told that the population increased, we would expect the
slope to be positive. This positive slope we calculated is therefore
reasonable.
:::

:::: {#fs-id2064450 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

The population of a small town increased from 1,442 to 1,868 between
2009 and 2012. Find the change of population per year if we assume the
change was constant from 2009 to 2012.

$$m = \frac{1,868 - 1,442}{2,012 - 2,009} = \frac{426}{3} = \text{142 people per year}$$
::::

# Writing and Interpreting an Equation for a Linear Function {#fs-id1700480}

Recall from [Equations and Inequalities](#) that we wrote equations in
both the slope-intercept form and the point-slope form. Now we can
choose which method to use to write equations for linear functions based
on the information we are given. That information may be provided in the
form of a graph, a point and a slope, two points, and so on. Look at the
graph of the function f in [\#](#).

<figure id="CNX_Precalc_Figure_02_01_006">

</figure>

We are not given the slope of the line, but we can choose any two points
on the line to find the slope. Let's choose (0,7) and (4,4).

$$\begin{array}{ccl}
m & = & \frac{y_{2} - y_{1}}{x_{2} - x_{1}} \\
 & = & \frac{4 - 7}{4 - 0} \\
 & = & {- \frac{3}{4}}
\end{array}$$

Now we can substitute the slope and the coordinates of one of the points
into the point-slope form.

$$\begin{array}{rcl}
{y - y_{1}} & = & {m\left( x - x_{1} \right)} \\
{\mspace{9mu} y - 4} & = & {- \frac{3}{4}(x - 4)}
\end{array}$$

If we want to rewrite the equation in the slope-intercept form, we would
find

$$\begin{array}{rcl}
{y - 4} & = & {- \frac{3}{4}(x - 4)} \\
{y - 4} & = & {- \frac{3}{4}x + 3} \\
y & = & {- \frac{3}{4}x + 7}
\end{array}$$

If we want to find the slope-intercept form without first writing the
point-slope form, we could have recognized that the line crosses the
*y*-axis when the output value is 7. Therefore, b=7. We now have the
initial value b and the slope m so we can substitute m and b into the
slope-intercept form of a line.

So the function is f(x)=− 3 4 x+7, and the linear equation would be y=−
3 4 x+7.

:::: {#fs-id1562836 .note}
::: title
:::

How To

*Given the graph of a linear function, write an equation to represent
the function.*

Identify two points on the line.

Use the two points to calculate the slope.

Determine where the line crosses the

y

-axis to identify the

y

-intercept by visual inspection.

Substitute the slope and

y

-intercept into the slope-intercept form of a line equation.
::::

::: {#Example_04_01_05 .example}
Write an equation for a linear function given a graph of f shown in
[\#](#).

<figure id="CNX_Precalc_Figure_02_01_008a">

</figure>

Identify two points on the line, such as (0,2) and (−2,−4). Use the
points to calculate the slope.

$$\begin{array}{ccl}
m & = & \frac{y_{2} - y_{1}}{x_{2} - x_{1}} \\
 & = & \frac{-4 - 2}{-2 - 0} \\
 & = & \frac{-6}{-2} \\
 & = & 3
\end{array}$$

Substitute the slope and the coordinates of one of the points into the
point-slope form.

$$\begin{array}{rcl}
{y - y_{1}} & = & {m\left( x - x_{1} \right)} \\
{y - (-4)} & = & {3(x - (-2))} \\
{y + 4} & = & {3(x + 2)}
\end{array}$$

We can use algebra to rewrite the equation in the slope-intercept form.

$$\begin{array}{rcl}
{y + 4} & = & {3(x + 2)} \\
{y + 4} & = & {3x + 6} \\
y & = & {3x + 2}
\end{array}$$

This makes sense because we can see from [\#](#) that the line crosses
the *y*-axis at the point ( 0,2 ), which is the *y*-intercept, so b=2.

<figure id="CNX_Precalc_Figure_02_01_008b">

</figure>
:::

::: {#Example_04_01_06 .example}
Suppose Ben starts a company in which he incurs a fixed cost of \$1,250
per month for the overhead, which includes his office rent. His
production costs are \$37.50 per item. Write a linear function C where
C( x ) is the cost for x items produced in a given month.

The fixed cost is present every month, \$1,250. The costs that can vary
include the cost to produce each item, which is \$37.50. The variable
cost, called the marginal cost, is represented by 37.5. The cost Ben
incurs is the sum of these two costs, represented by C( x )=1250+37.5x.

If Ben produces 100 items in a month, his monthly cost is found by
substituting 100 for x.

$$\begin{array}{ccl}
{C(100)} & = & {1250 + 37.5(100)} \\
 & = & 5000
\end{array}$$

So his monthly cost would be \$5,000.
:::

::: {#Example_04_01_07 .example}
If f is a linear function, with f(3)=−2, and f(8)=1, find an equation
for the function in slope-intercept form.

We can write the given points using coordinates.

$$\begin{array}{rcl}
{f(3)} & = & {- 2\rightarrow(3,-2)} \\
{f(8)} & = & {1\rightarrow(8,1)}
\end{array}$$

We can then use the points to calculate the slope.

$$\begin{array}{ccl}
m & = & \frac{y_{2} - y_{1}}{x_{2} - x_{1}} \\
 & = & \frac{1 - (-2)}{8 - 3} \\
 & = & \frac{3}{5}
\end{array}$$

Substitute the slope and the coordinates of one of the points into the
point-slope form.

$$\begin{array}{rcl}
{y - y_{1}} & = & {m\left( {x - x_{1}} \right)} \\
{y - (-2)} & = & {\frac{3}{5}(x - 3)}
\end{array}$$

We can use algebra to rewrite the equation in the slope-intercept form.

$$\begin{array}{rcl}
{y + 2} & = & {\frac{3}{5}(x - 3)} \\
{y + 2} & = & {\frac{3}{5}x - \frac{9}{5}} \\
y & = & {\frac{3}{5}x - \frac{19}{5}}
\end{array}$$
:::

:::: {#fs-id1441796 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

If f(x) is a linear function, with f(2)=--11, and f(4)=−25, write an
equation for the function in slope-intercept form.

y=−7x+3
::::

# Modeling Real-World Problems with Linear Functions {#fs-id1577178}

In the real world, problems are not always explicitly stated in terms of
a function or represented with a graph. Fortunately, we can analyze the
problem by first representing it as a linear function and then
interpreting the components of the function. As long as we know, or can
figure out, the initial value and the rate of change of a linear
function, we can solve many different kinds of real-world problems.

:::: {#fs-id1715673 .note}
::: title
:::

How To

*Given a linear function f and the initial value and rate of change,
evaluate f( c ).*

Determine the initial value and the rate of change (slope).

Substitute the values into

f

(

x

)

=

m

x

\+

b

.

Evaluate the function at

x

=

c

.
::::

::: {#Example_04_01_08 .example}
Marcus currently has 200 songs in his music collection. Every month, he
adds 15 new songs. Write a formula for the number of songs, N, in his
collection as a function of time, t, the number of months. How many
songs will he own at the end of one year?

The initial value for this function is 200 because he currently owns 200
songs, so N(0)=200, which means that b=200.

The number of songs increases by 15 songs per month, so the rate of
change is 15 songs per month. Therefore we know that m=15. We can
substitute the initial value and the rate of change into the
slope-intercept form of a line.

<figure id="eip-idm461188240">

</figure>

We can write the formula N(t)=15t+200.

With this formula, we can then predict how many songs Marcus will have
at the end of one year (12 months). In other words, we can evaluate the
function at t=12.

$$\begin{array}{ccl}
{N(12)} & = & {15(12) + 200} \\
 & = & {180 + 200} \\
 & = & 380
\end{array}$$

Marcus will have 380 songs in 12 months.

Notice that *N* is an increasing linear function. As the input (the
number of months) increases, the output (number of songs) increases as
well.
:::

::: {#Example_04_01_09 .example}
Working as an insurance salesperson, Ilya earns a base salary plus a
commission on each new policy. Therefore, Ilya's weekly income I,
depends on the number of new policies, n, he sells during the week. Last
week he sold 3 new policies, and earned \$760 for the week. The week
before, he sold 5 new policies and earned \$920. Find an equation for
I(n), and interpret the meaning of the components of the equation.

The given information gives us two input-output pairs: (3,760) and
(5,920). We start by finding the rate of change.

$$\begin{array}{ccl}
m & = & \frac{920 - 760}{5 - 3} \\
 & = & \frac{\$ 160}{2~\text{policies}} \\
 & = & {\text{\$}80\mspace{9mu}\text{per}\mspace{9mu}\text{policy}}
\end{array}$$

Keeping track of units can help us interpret this quantity. Income
increased by \$160 when the number of policies increased by 2, so the
rate of change is \$80 per policy. Therefore, Ilya earns a commission of
\$80 for each policy sold during the week.

We can then solve for the initial value.

$$\begin{array}{rclc}
{I(n)} & = & {80n + b} & \\
760 & = & {80(3) + b} & {\quad\quad\text{when}\mspace{9mu} n = 3,I(3) = 760} \\
760 & - & {80(3) = b} & \\
520 & = & b & 
\end{array}$$

The value of b is the starting value for the function and represents
Ilya's income when n=0, or when no new policies are sold. We can
interpret this as Ilya's base salary for the week, which does not depend
upon the number of policies sold.

We can now write the final equation.

$$I(n) = 80n + 520$$

Our final interpretation is that Ilya's base salary is \$520 per week
and he earns an additional \$80 commission for each policy sold.
:::

::: {#Example_04_01_010 .example}
[\#](#) relates the number of rats in a population to time, in weeks.
Use the table to write a linear equation.

  -------------------------- ------ ------ ------ ------
  *number of weeks, *w**     0      2      4      6
  *number of rats, *P(w)**   1000   1080   1160   1240
  -------------------------- ------ ------ ------ ------

We can see from the table that the initial value for the number of rats
is 1000, so b=1000.

Rather than solving for m, we can tell from looking at the table that
the population increases by 80 for every 2 weeks that pass. This means
that the rate of change is 80 rats per 2 weeks, which can be simplified
to 40 rats per week.

$$P(w) = 40w + 1000$$

If we did not notice the rate of change from the table we could still
solve for the slope using any two points from the table. For example,
using (2,1080) and (6,1240)

$$\begin{array}{ccl}
m & = & \frac{1240 - 1080}{6 - 2} \\
 & = & \frac{160}{4} \\
 & = & 40
\end{array}$$
:::

:::: {#fs-id1691538 .note}
::: title
:::

Q&A

*Is the initial value always provided in a table of values like
[\#](#)?*

*No. Sometimes the initial value is provided in a table of values, but
sometimes it is not. If you see an input of 0, then the initial value
would be the corresponding output. If the initial value is not provided
because there is no value of input on the table equal to 0, find the
slope, substitute one coordinate pair and the slope into f(x)=mx+b, and
solve for b.*
::::

:::: {#fs-id1619832 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

A new plant food was introduced to a young tree to test its effect on
the height of the tree. [\#](#) shows the height of the tree, in feet, x
months since the measurements began. Write a linear function, H(x),
where x is the number of months since the start of the experiment.

  ------------ ------ ------ ------ ------ ------
  x            0      2      4      8      12
  **H*(*x*)*   12.5   13.5   14.5   16.5   18.5
  ------------ ------ ------ ------ ------ ------

H( x )=0.5x+12.5
::::

# Graphing Linear Functions {#fs-id2458614}

Now that we've seen and interpreted graphs of linear functions, let's
take a look at how to create the graphs. There are three basic methods
of graphing linear functions. The first is by plotting points and then
drawing a line through the points. The second is by using the
*y-*intercept and slope. And the third method is by using
transformations of the identity function f(x)=x.

## Graphing a Function by Plotting Points {#fs-id2568421}

To find points of a function, we can choose input values, evaluate the
function at these input values, and calculate output values. The input
values and corresponding output values form coordinate pairs. We then
plot the coordinate pairs on a grid. In general, we should evaluate the
function at a minimum of two inputs in order to find at least two points
on the graph. For example, given the function, f(x)=2x, we might use the
input values 1 and 2. Evaluating the function for an input value of 1
yields an output value of 2, which is represented by the point (1,2).
Evaluating the function for an input value of 2 yields an output value
of 4, which is represented by the point (2,4). Choosing three points is
often advisable because if all three points do not fall on the same
line, we know we made an error.

:::: {#fs-id2248016 .note}
::: title
:::

How To

*Given a linear function, graph by plotting points.*

Choose a minimum of two input values.

Evaluate the function at each input value.

Use the resulting output values to identify coordinate pairs.

Plot the coordinate pairs on a grid.

Draw a line through the points.
::::

::: {#Example_04_01_011 .example}
Graph f(x)=− 2 3 x+5 by plotting points.

Begin by choosing input values. This function includes a fraction with a
denominator of 3, so let's choose multiples of 3 as input values. We
will choose 0, 3, and 6.

Evaluate the function at each input value, and use the output value to
identify coordinate pairs.

$$\begin{aligned}
{x = 0} & {\qquad f(0) = - \frac{2}{3}(0) + 5 = 5\Rightarrow(0,5)} \\
{x = 3} & {\qquad f(3) = - \frac{2}{3}(3) + 5 = 3\Rightarrow(3,3)} \\
{x = 6} & {\qquad f(6) = - \frac{2}{3}(6) + 5 = 1\Rightarrow(6,1)}
\end{aligned}$$

Plot the coordinate pairs and draw a line through the points. [\#](#)
represents the graph of the function f(x)=− 2 3 x+5.

<figure id="CNX_Precalc_Figure_02_02_001">

</figure>

The graph of the function is a line as expected for a linear function.
In addition, the graph has a downward slant, which indicates a negative
slope. This is also expected from the negative, constant rate of change
in the equation for the function.
:::

:::: {#fs-id2196727 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Graph f(x)=− 3 4 x+6 by plotting points.
::::

## Graphing a Function Using *y-*intercept and Slope {#fs-id2654013}

Another way to graph linear functions is by using specific
characteristics of the function rather than plotting points. The first
characteristic is its *y-*intercept, which is the point at which the
input value is zero. To find the *y-*intercept, we can set x=0 in the
equation.

The other characteristic of the linear function is its slope*.*

Let's consider the following function.

$$f(x) = \frac{1}{2}x + 1$$

The slope is 1 2 . Because the slope is positive, we know the graph will
slant upward from left to right. The *y-*intercept is the point on the
graph when x=0. The graph crosses the *y*-axis at (0,1). Now we know the
slope and the *y*-intercept. We can begin graphing by plotting the point
(0,1). We know that the slope is the change in the *y*-coordinate over
the change in the *x*-coordinate. This is commonly referred to as rise
over run, m= rise run . From our example, we have m= 1 2 , which means
that the rise is 1 and the run is 2. So starting from our *y*-intercept
(0,1), we can rise 1 and then run 2, or run 2 and then rise 1. We repeat
until we have a few points, and then we draw a line through the points
as shown in [\#](#).

<figure id="CNX_Precalc_Figure_02_02_003">

</figure>

:::: {#fs-id2202042 .note}
::: title
Graphical Interpretation of a Linear Function
:::

In the equation f(x)=mx+b

b

is the

y

-intercept of the graph and indicates the point

(

0

,

b

)

at which the graph crosses the

y

-axis.

m

is the slope of the line and indicates the vertical displacement (rise)
and horizontal displacement (run) between each successive pair of
points. Recall the formula for the slope:

$$m = \frac{\text{change~in~output~(rise)}}{\text{change~in~input~(run)}} = \frac{\Delta y}{\Delta x} = \frac{y_{2} - y_{1}}{x_{2} - x_{1}}$$
::::

:::: {#fs-id2378432 .note}
::: title
:::

Q&A

*Do all linear functions have *y*-intercepts?*

*Yes. All linear functions cross the y-axis and therefore have
y-intercepts.* (Note: *A vertical line is parallel to the y-axis does
not have a y-intercept, but it is not a function*.)
::::

:::: {#fs-id2354603 .note}
::: title
:::

How To

*Given the equation for a linear function, graph the function using the
*y*-intercept and slope.*

Evaluate the function at an input value of zero to find the

y-

intercept.

Identify the slope as the rate of change of the input value.

Plot the point represented by the

y-

intercept.

Use

rise

run

to determine at least two more points on the line.

Sketch the line that passes through the points.
::::

::: {#Example_04_01_012 .example}
Graph f(x)=− 2 3 x+5 using the *y-*intercept and slope.

Evaluate the function at x=0 to find the *y-*intercept. The output value
when x=0 is 5, so the graph will cross the *y*-axis at (0,5).

According to the equation for the function, the slope of the line is − 2
3 . This tells us that for each vertical decrease in the "rise" of --2
units, the "run" increases by 3 units in the horizontal direction. We
can now graph the function by first plotting the *y*-intercept on the
graph in [\#](#). From the initial value (0,5) we move down 2 units and
to the right 3 units. We can extend the line to the left and right by
repeating, and then drawing a line through the points.

<figure id="CNX_Precalc_Figure_02_02_004">

</figure>

The graph slants downward from left to right, which means it has a
negative slope as expected.
:::

:::: {#fs-id2382682 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Find a point on the graph we drew in [\#](#) that has a negative
*x*-value.

Possible answers include (−3,7), (−6,9), or (−9,11).
::::

## Graphing a Function Using Transformations {#fs-id2228779}

Another option for graphing is to use a transformation of the identity
function f(x)=x. A function may be transformed by a shift up, down,
left, or right. A function may also be transformed using a reflection,
stretch, or compression.

### Vertical Stretch or Compression {#fs-id2760955}

In the equation f(x)=mx, the m is acting as the vertical stretch or
compression of the identity function. When m is negative, there is also
a vertical reflection of the graph. Notice in [\#](#) that multiplying
the equation of f(x)=x by m stretches the graph of f by a factor of m
units if m\>1 and compresses the graph of f by a factor of m units if
0\<m\<1. This means the larger the absolute value of m, the steeper the
slope.

<figure id="CNX_Precalc_Figure_02_02_005">

</figure>

### Vertical Shift {#fs-id2458764}

In f(x)=mx+b, the b acts as the vertical shift, moving the graph up and
down without affecting the slope of the line. Notice in [\#](#) that
adding a value of b to the equation of f( x )=x shifts the graph of f a
total of b units up if b is positive and \|b\| units down if b is
negative.

<figure id="CNX_Precalc_Figure_02_02_006">

</figure>

Using vertical stretches or compressions along with vertical shifts is
another way to look at identifying different types of linear functions.
Although this may not be the easiest way to graph this type of function,
it is still important to practice each method.

:::: {#fs-id2169375 .note}
::: title
:::

How To

*Given the equation of a linear function, use transformations to graph
the linear function in the form f( x )=mx+b.*

Graph

f

(

x

)

=

x

.

Vertically stretch or compress the graph by a factor

m

.

Shift the graph up or down

b

units.
::::

::: {#Example_04_01_013 .example}
Graph f(x)= 1 2 x−3 using transformations.

The equation for the function shows that m= 1 2 so the identity function
is vertically compressed by 1 2 . The equation for the function also
shows that b=−3 so the identity function is vertically shifted down 3
units. First, graph the identity function, and show the vertical
compression as in [\#](#).

<figure id="CNX_Precalc_Figure_02_02_007">

</figure>

Then show the vertical shift as in [\#](#).

<figure id="CNX_Precalc_Figure_02_02_008">

</figure>
:::

:::: {#fs-id1861982 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Graph f(x)=4+2x using transformations.
::::

:::: {#fs-id2238435 .note}
::: title
:::

Q&A

*In [\#](#), could we have sketched the graph by reversing the order of
the transformations?*

*No. The order of the transformations follows the order of operations.
When the function is evaluated at a given input, the corresponding
output is calculated by following the order of operations. This is why
we performed the compression first. For example, following the order:
Let the input be 2.*

$$\begin{array}{ccl}
{f(2)} & = & {\frac{1}{2}(2) - 3} \\
 & = & {1 - 3} \\
 & = & -2
\end{array}$$
::::

# Writing the Equation for a Function from the Graph of a Line {#fs-id2239536}

Earlier, we wrote the equation for a linear function from a graph. Now
we can extend what we know about graphing linear functions to analyze
graphs a little more closely. Begin by taking a look at [\#](#). We can
see right away that the graph crosses the *y*-axis at the point (0,4) so
this is the *y*-intercept.

<figure id="CNX_Precalc_Figure_02_04_010">

</figure>

Then we can calculate the slope by finding the rise and run. We can
choose any two points, but let's look at the point (--2,0). To get from
this point to the *y-*intercept, we must move up 4 units (rise) and to
the right 2 units (run). So the slope must be

$$m = \frac{\text{rise}}{\text{run}} = \frac{4}{2} = 2$$

Substituting the slope and *y-*intercept into the slope-intercept form
of a line gives

$$y = 2x + 4$$

:::: {#fs-id2214619 .note}
::: title
:::

How To

*Given a graph of linear function, find the equation to describe the
function.*

Identify the

y-

intercept of an equation.

Choose two points to determine the slope.

Substitute the

y-

intercept and slope into the slope-intercept form of a line.
::::

::: {#Example_04_01_014 .example}
Match each equation of the linear functions with one of the lines in
[\#](#).

ⓐ

f

(

x

)

=

2

x

\+

3

ⓑ

g

(

x

)

=

2

x

−

3

ⓒ

h

(

x

)

=

−

2

x

\+

3

ⓓ

j

(

x

)

=

1

2

x

\+

3

<figure id="CNX_Precalc_Figure_02_04_011">

</figure>

Analyze the information for each function.

ⓐ

This function has a slope of 2 and a

y

-intercept of 3. It must pass through the point (0, 3) and slant upward
from left to right. We can use two points to find the slope, or we can
compare it with the other functions listed. Function

g

has the same slope, but a different

y-

intercept. Lines I and III have the same slant because they have the
same slope. Line III does not pass through

(

0

,

3

)

so

f

must be represented by line I.

ⓑ

This function also has a slope of 2, but a

y

-intercept of

−3.

It must pass through the point

(

0

,

−3

)

and slant upward from left to right. It must be represented by line III.

ⓒ

This function has a slope of --2 and a

y-

intercept of 3. This is the only function listed with a negative slope,
so it must be represented by line IV because it slants downward from
left to right.

ⓓ

This function has a slope of

1

2

and a

y-

intercept of 3. It must pass through the point (0, 3) and slant upward
from left to right. Lines I and II pass through

(

0

,

3

)

,

but the slope of

j

is less than the slope of

f

so the line for

j

must be flatter. This function is represented by Line II.

Now we can re-label the lines as in [\#](#).

<figure id="CNX_Precalc_Figure_02_04_012">

</figure>
:::

## Finding the *x*-intercept of a Line {#fs-id2256536}

So far we have been finding the *y-*intercepts of a function: the point
at which the graph of the function crosses the *y*-axis. Recall that a
function may also have an *x*-intercept, which is the *x*-coordinate of
the point where the graph of the function crosses the *x*-axis. In other
words, it is the input value when the output value is zero.

To find the *x*-intercept, set a function f(x) equal to zero and solve
for the value of x. For example, consider the function shown.

$$f(x) = 3x - 6$$

Set the function equal to 0 and solve for x.

$$\begin{array}{rcl}
0 & = & {3x - 6} \\
6 & = & {3x} \\
2 & = & x \\
x & = & 2
\end{array}$$

The graph of the function crosses the *x*-axis at the point (2,0).

:::: {#fs-id2395312 .note}
::: title
:::

Q&A

*Do all linear functions have *x*-intercepts?*

*No. However, linear functions of the form y=c, where c is a nonzero
real number are the only examples of linear functions with no
x-intercept. For example, y=5 is a horizontal line 5 units above the
x-axis. This function has no x-intercepts, as shown in *[\#](#).**

<figure id="CNX_Precalc_Figure_02_02_026">

</figure>
::::

:::: {#fs-id1855647 .note}
::: title
*x*-intercept
:::

The *x*-intercept of the function is value of x when f(x)=0. It can be
solved by the equation 0=mx+b.
::::

::: {#Example_04_01_015 .example}
Find the *x*-intercept of f(x)= 1 2 x−3.

Set the function equal to zero to solve for x.

$$\begin{array}{rcl}
0 & = & {\frac{1}{2}x - 3} \\
3 & = & {\frac{1}{2}x} \\
6 & = & x \\
x & = & 6
\end{array}$$

The graph crosses the *x*-axis at the point (6,0).

A graph of the function is shown in [\#](#). We can see that the
*x*-intercept is (6,0) as we expected.

<figure id="CNX_Precalc_Figure_02_04_013">

</figure>
:::

:::: {#fs-id1796746 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Find the *x*-intercept of f(x)= 1 4 x−4.

( 16,0 )
::::

## Describing Horizontal and Vertical Lines {#fs-id2403100}

There are two special cases of lines on a graph---horizontal and
vertical lines. A horizontal line indicates a constant output, or
*y*-value. In [\#](#), we see that the output has a value of 2 for every
input value. The change in outputs between any two points, therefore, is
0. In the slope formula, the numerator is 0, so the slope is 0. If we
use m=0 in the equation f(x)=mx+b, the equation simplifies to f(x)=b. In
other words, the value of the function is a constant. This graph
represents the function f(x)=2.

<figure id="CNX_Precalc_Figure_02_04_014">

</figure>

A vertical line indicates a constant input, or *x*-value. We can see
that the input value for every point on the line is 2, but the output
value varies. Because this input value is mapped to more than one output
value, a vertical line does not represent a function. Notice that
between any two points, the change in the input values is zero. In the
slope formula, the denominator will be zero, so the slope of a vertical
line is undefined.

<figure id="Image_04_01_027">

</figure>

A vertical line, such as the one in [\#](#)*,* has an *x*-intercept, but
no *y-*intercept unless it's the line x=0. This graph represents the
line x=2.

<figure id="CNX_Precalc_Figure_02_04_016">

</figure>

:::: {#fs-id2395146 .note}
::: title
Horizontal and Vertical Lines
:::

Lines can be horizontal or vertical.

A horizontal line is a line defined by an equation in the form f(x)=b.

A vertical line is a line defined by an equation in the form x=a.
::::

::: {#Example_04_01_016 .example}
Write the equation of the line graphed in [\#](#).

<figure id="CNX_Precalc_Figure_02_04_017">

</figure>

For any *x*-value, the *y*-value is −4, so the equation is y=−4.
:::

::: {#Example_04_01_017 .example}
Write the equation of the line graphed in [\#](#).

<figure id="CNX_Precalc_Figure_02_04_018">

</figure>

The constant *x*-value is 7, so the equation is x=7.
:::

# Determining Whether Lines are Parallel or Perpendicular {#fs-id2239916}

The two lines in [\#](#) are parallel lines: they will never intersect.
They have exactly the same steepness, which means their slopes are
identical. The only difference between the two lines is the
*y*-intercept. If we shifted one line vertically toward the other, they
would become coincident.

<figure id="CNX_Precalc_Figure_02_04_019">

</figure>

We can determine from their equations whether two lines are parallel by
comparing their slopes. If the slopes are the same and the
*y*-intercepts are different, the lines are parallel. If the slopes are
different, the lines are not parallel.

$$\begin{matrix}
{\left. \begin{array}{l}
{f(x) = - 2x + 6} \\
{f(x) = - 2x - 4}
\end{array} \right\}\mspace{9mu}\text{parallel}\qquad} & {\left. \begin{array}{l}
{f(x) = 3x + 2} \\
{f(x) = 2x + 2}
\end{array} \right\}\mspace{9mu}\text{not~parallel}}
\end{matrix}$$

Unlike parallel lines, perpendicular lines do intersect. Their
intersection forms a right, or 90-degree, angle. The two lines in
[\#](#) are perpendicular.

<figure id="CNX_Precalc_Figure_02_02_020">

</figure>

Perpendicular lines do not have the same slope. The slopes of
perpendicular lines are different from one another in a specific way.
The slope of one line is the negative reciprocal of the slope of the
other line. The product of a number and its reciprocal is 1. So, if m 1
and  m 2 are negative reciprocals of one another, they can be multiplied
together to yield --1.

$$m_{1}m_{2} = -1$$

To find the reciprocal of a number, divide 1 by the number. So the
reciprocal of 8 is 1 8 , and the reciprocal of 1 8 is 8. To find the
negative reciprocal, first find the reciprocal and then change the sign.

As with parallel lines, we can determine whether two lines are
perpendicular by comparing their slopes, assuming that the lines are
neither horizontal nor vertical. The slope of each line below is the
negative reciprocal of the other so the lines are perpendicular.

$$\begin{array}{rcll}
{f(x)} & = & {\frac{1}{4}x + 2} & {\qquad\text{negative~reciprocal~of}\mspace{9mu}\frac{1}{4}\mspace{9mu}\text{is~}-4} \\
{f(x)} & = & {-4x + 3} & {\qquad\text{negative~reciprocal~of}\mspace{9mu}-4\mspace{9mu}\text{is~}\frac{1}{4}}
\end{array}$$

The product of the slopes is --1.

$$- 4\left( \frac{1}{4} \right) = - 1$$

:::: {#fs-id2241566 .note}
::: title
Parallel and Perpendicular Lines
:::

Two lines are parallel lines if they do not intersect. The slopes of the
lines are the same.

$$f(x) = m_{1}x + b_{1}\mspace{9mu}\text{and}\mspace{9mu} g(x) = m_{2}x + b_{2}\mspace{9mu}\text{are~parallel~if~and~only~if~}m_{1} = m_{2}$$

If and only if b 1 = b 2 and m 1 = m 2 , we say the lines coincide.
Coincident lines are the same line.

Two lines are perpendicular lines if they intersect to form a right
angle.

$$f(x) = m_{1}x + b_{1}\mspace{9mu}\text{and}\mspace{9mu} g(x) = m_{2}x + b_{2}\mspace{9mu}\text{are~perpendicular~if~and~only~if}$$

$$m_{1}m_{2} = - 1,\text{so}\mspace{9mu} m_{2} = - \frac{1}{m_{1}}$$
::::

::: {#Example_04_01_018 .example}
Given the functions below, identify the functions whose graphs are a
pair of parallel lines and a pair of perpendicular lines.

$$\begin{array}{rclrcl}
{f(x)} & = & {2x + 3} & {\qquad h(x)} & = & {- 2x + 2} \\
{g(x)} & = & {\frac{1}{2}x - 4} & {\qquad j(x)} & = & {2x - 6}
\end{array}$$

Parallel lines have the same slope. Because the functions f(x)=2x+3 and
j(x)=2x−6 each have a slope of 2, they represent parallel lines.
Perpendicular lines have negative reciprocal slopes. Because −2 and 1 2
are negative reciprocals, the functions g(x)= 1 2 x−4 and h(x)=−2x+2
represent perpendicular lines.

A graph of the lines is shown in [\#](#).

<figure id="CNX_Precalc_Figure_02_02_021">

</figure>

The graph shows that the lines f(x)=2x+3 and j(x)=2x--6 are parallel,
and the lines g(x)= 1 2 x--4 and h(x)=−2x+2 are perpendicular.
:::

# Writing the Equation of a Line Parallel or Perpendicular to a Given Line {#fs-id2365851}

If we know the equation of a line, we can use what we know about slope
to write the equation of a line that is either parallel or perpendicular
to the given line.

## Writing Equations of Parallel Lines {#fs-id2365861}

Suppose for example, we are given the equation shown.

$$f(x) = 3x + 1$$

We know that the slope of the line formed by the function is 3. We also
know that the *y-*intercept is (0,1). Any other line with a slope of 3
will be parallel to f(x). So the lines formed by all of the following
functions will be parallel to f(x).

$$\begin{array}{rcl}
{g(x)} & = & {3x + 6} \\
{h(x)} & = & {3x + 1} \\
{p(x)} & = & {3x + \frac{2}{3}}
\end{array}$$

Suppose then we want to write the equation of a line that is parallel to
f and passes through the point (1,7). This type of problem is often
described as a point-slope problem because we have a point and a slope.
In our example, we know that the slope is 3. We need to determine which
value of b will give the correct line. We can begin with the point-slope
form of an equation for a line, and then rewrite it in the
slope-intercept form.

$$\begin{array}{rcl}
{y - y_{1}} & = & {m\left( x - x_{1} \right)} \\
{y - 7} & = & {3(x - 1)} \\
{y - 7} & = & {3x - 3} \\
y & = & {3x + 4}
\end{array}$$

So g(x)=3x+4 is parallel to f( x )=3x+1 and passes through the point
(1,7).

:::: {#fs-id1797404 .note}
::: title
:::

How To

*Given the equation of a function and a point through which its graph
passes, write the equation of a line parallel to the given line that
passes through the given point.*

Find the slope of the function.

Substitute the given values into either the general point-slope equation
or the slope-intercept equation for a line.

Simplify.
::::

::: {#Example_04_01_019 .example}
Find a line parallel to the graph of f(x)=3x+6 that passes through the
point (3,0).

The slope of the given line is 3. If we choose the slope-intercept form,
we can substitute m=3,x=3, and f(x)=0 into the slope-intercept form to
find the *y-*intercept.

$$\begin{array}{rcl}
{g(x)} & = & {3x + b} \\
0 & = & {3(3) + b} \\
b & = & –9
\end{array}$$

The line parallel to f(x) that passes through (3,0) is g(x)=3x−9.

We can confirm that the two lines are parallel by graphing them. [\#](#)
shows that the two lines will never intersect.

<figure id="CNX_Precalc_Figure_02_02_022">

</figure>
:::

## Writing Equations of Perpendicular Lines {#fs-id2249992}

We can use a very similar process to write the equation for a line
perpendicular to a given line. Instead of using the same slope, however,
we use the negative reciprocal of the given slope. Suppose we are given
the function shown.

$$f(x) = 2x + 4$$

The slope of the line is 2, and its negative reciprocal is − 1 2 . Any
function with a slope of − 1 2 will be perpendicular to f(x). So the
lines formed by all of the following functions will be perpendicular to
f(x).

$$\begin{array}{rcl}
{g(x)} & = & {- \frac{1}{2}x + 4} \\
{h(x)} & = & {- \frac{1}{2}x + 2} \\
{p(x)} & = & {- \frac{1}{2}x - \frac{1}{2}}
\end{array}$$

As before, we can narrow down our choices for a particular perpendicular
line if we know that it passes through a given point. Suppose then we
want to write the equation of a line that is perpendicular to f(x) and
passes through the point (4,0). We already know that the slope is − 1 2
. Now we can use the point to find the *y*-intercept by substituting the
given values into the slope-intercept form of a line and solving for b.

$$\begin{array}{rcl}
{g(x)} & = & {mx + b} \\
0 & = & {- \frac{1}{2}(4) + b} \\
0 & = & {-2 + b} \\
2 & = & b \\
b & = & 2
\end{array}$$

The equation for the function with a slope of − 1 2 and a *y-*intercept
of 2 is

$$g(x) = - \frac{1}{2}x + 2$$

So g(x)=− 1 2 x+2 is perpendicular to f( x )=2x+4 and passes through the
point (4,0). Be aware that perpendicular lines may not look obviously
perpendicular on a graphing calculator unless we use the square zoom
feature.

:::: {#fs-id2424376 .note}
::: title
:::

Q&A

*A horizontal line has a slope of zero and a vertical line has an
undefined slope. These two lines are perpendicular, but the product of
their slopes is not --1. Doesn't this fact contradict the definition of
perpendicular lines?*

*No. For two perpendicular linear functions, the product of their slopes
is --1. However, a vertical line is not a function so the definition is
not contradicted.*
::::

:::: {#fs-id2424399 .note}
::: title
:::

How To

*Given the equation of a function and a point through which its graph
passes, write the equation of a line perpendicular to the given line.*

Find the slope of the function.

Determine the negative reciprocal of the slope.

Substitute the new slope and the values for

x

and

y

from the coordinate pair provided into

g

(

x

)

=

m

x

\+

b

.

Solve for

b

.

Write the equation of the line.
::::

::: {#Example_04_01_20 .example}
Find the equation of a line perpendicular to f(x)=3x+3 that passes
through the point (3,0).

The original line has slope m=3, so the slope of the perpendicular line
will be its negative reciprocal, or − 1 3 . Using this slope and the
given point, we can find the equation of the line.

$$\begin{array}{rcl}
{g(x)} & = & {–\frac{1}{3}x + b} \\
0 & = & {–\frac{1}{3}(3) + b} \\
1 & = & b \\
b & = & 1
\end{array}$$

The line perpendicular to f(x) that passes through (3,0) is g(x)=− 1 3
x+1.

A graph of the two lines is shown in [\#](#).

<figure id="CNX_Precalc_Figure_02_02_023">

</figure>

Note that that if we graph perpendicular lines on a graphing calculator
using standard zoom, the lines may not appear to be perpendicular.
Adjusting the window will make it possible to zoom in further to see the
intersection more closely.
:::

:::: {#fs-id2214476 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Given the function h(x)=2x−4, write an equation for the line passing
through ( 0,0 ) that is

ⓐ

parallel to

h

(

x

)

ⓑ

perpendicular to

h

(

x

)

ⓐ

f

(

x

)

=

2

x

;

ⓑ

g

(

x

)

=

−

1

2

x
::::

:::: {#fs-id2363495 .note}
::: title
:::

How To

*Given two points on a line and a third point, write the equation of the
perpendicular line that passes through the point.*

Determine the slope of the line passing through the points.

Find the negative reciprocal of the slope.

Use the slope-intercept form or point-slope form to write the equation
by substituting the known values.

Simplify.
::::

::: {#Example_04_01_21 .example}
A line passes through the points (−2,6) and (4,5). Find the equation of
a perpendicular line that passes through the point (4,5).

From the two points of the given line, we can calculate the slope of
that line.

$$\begin{array}{ccl}
m_{1} & = & \frac{5 - 6}{4 - (-2)} \\
 & = & \frac{- 1}{6} \\
 & = & {- \frac{1}{6}}
\end{array}$$

Find the negative reciprocal of the slope.

$$\begin{array}{ccl}
m_{2} & = & \frac{- 1}{- \frac{1}{6}} \\
 & = & {-1\left( {- \frac{6}{1}} \right)} \\
 & = & 6
\end{array}$$

We can then solve for the *y-*intercept of the line passing through the
point (4,5).

$$\begin{array}{rcl}
{g(x)} & = & {6x + b} \\
5 & = & {6(4) + b} \\
5 & = & {24 + b} \\
-19 & = & b \\
b & = & -19
\end{array}$$

The equation for the line that is perpendicular to the line passing
through the two given points and also passes through point (4,5) is

$$y = 6x - 19$$
:::

:::: {#fs-id1349228 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

A line passes through the points, (−2,−15) and (2,−3). Find the equation
of a perpendicular line that passes through the point, (6,4).

y=-- 1 3 x+6
::::

:::: {#fs-id2380779 .note}
::: title
:::

Media

Access this online resource for additional instruction and practice with
linear functions.

Linear Functions

Finding Input of Function from the Output and Graph

Graphing Functions using Tables
::::

# Key Concepts {#fs-id2380812}

Linear functions can be represented in words, function notation, tabular
form, and graphical form. See

.

An increasing linear function results in a graph that slants upward from
left to right and has a positive slope. A decreasing linear function
results in a graph that slants downward from left to right and has a
negative slope. A constant linear function results in a graph that is a
horizontal line. See

.

Slope is a rate of change. The slope of a linear function can be
calculated by dividing the difference between

y

-values by the difference in corresponding

x

-values of any two points on the line. See

and

.

An equation for a linear function can be written from a graph. See

.

The equation for a linear function can be written if the slope

m

and initial value

b

are known. See

and

.

A linear function can be used to solve real-world problems given
information in different forms. See

,

,

and

.

Linear functions can be graphed by plotting points or by using the

y

-intercept and slope. See

and

.

Graphs of linear functions may be transformed by using shifts up, down,
left, or right, as well as through stretches, compressions, and
reflections. See

.

The equation for a linear function can be written by interpreting the
graph. See

.

The

x

-intercept is the point at which the graph of a linear function crosses
the

x

-axis. See

.

Horizontal lines are written in the form,

f

(

x

)

=

b

.

See

.

Vertical lines are written in the form,

x

=

b

.

See

.

Parallel lines have the same slope. Perpendicular lines have negative
reciprocal slopes, assuming neither is vertical. See

.

A line parallel to another line, passing through a given point, may be
found by substituting the slope value of the line and the

x

\- and

y

-values of the given point into the equation,

f

(

x

)

=

m

x

\+

b

,

and using the

b

that results. Similarly, the point-slope form of an equation can also be
used. See

.

A line perpendicular to another line, passing through a given point, may
be found in the same manner, with the exception of using the negative
reciprocal slope. See

and

.

# Section Exercises {#fs-id1799811}

## Verbal {#fs-id1799815}

Terry is skiing down a steep hill. Terry\'s elevation, E(t), in feet
after t seconds is given by E(t)=3000−70t. Write a complete sentence
describing Terry's starting elevation and how it is changing over time.

Terry starts at an elevation of 3000 feet and descends 70 feet per
second.

Jessica is walking home from a friend's house. After 2 minutes she is
1.4 miles from home. Twelve minutes after leaving, she is 0.9 miles from
home. What is her rate in miles per hour?

A boat is 100 miles away from the marina, sailing directly toward it at
10 miles per hour. Write an equation for the distance of the boat from
the marina after *t* hours.

d( t )=100−10t

If the graphs of two linear functions are perpendicular, describe the
relationship between the slopes and the *y*-intercepts.

If a horizontal line has the equation f( x )=a and a vertical line has
the equation x=a, what is the point of intersection? Explain why what
you found is the point of intersection.

The point of intersection is ( a,a ). This is because for the horizontal
line, all of the y coordinates are a and for the vertical line, all of
the x coordinates are a. The point of intersection is on both lines and
therefore will have these two characteristics.

## Algebraic {#fs-id2270562}

For the following exercises, determine whether the equation of the curve
can be written as a linear function.

y= 1 4 x+6

y=3x−5

Yes

y=3 x 2 −2

3x+5y=15

Yes

3 x 2 +5y=15

3x+5 y 2 =15

No

−2 x 2 +3 y 2 =6

− x−3 5 =2y

Yes

For the following exercises, determine whether each function is
increasing or decreasing.

f( x )=4x+3

g( x )=5x+6

Increasing

a( x )=5−2x

b( x )=8−3x

Decreasing

h( x )=−2x+4

k( x )=−4x+1

Decreasing

j( x )= 1 2 x−3

p( x )= 1 4 x−5

Increasing

n( x )=− 1 3 x−2

m( x )=− 3 8 x+3

Decreasing

For the following exercises, find the slope of the line that passes
through the two given points.

(2,4) and (4,10)

(1,5) and (4,11)

2

(--1,4) and (5,2)

(8,--2) and (4,6)

--2

(6,11) and (--4,3)

For the following exercises, given each set of information, find a
linear equation satisfying the conditions, if possible.

f(−5)=−4, and f(5)=2

y= 3 5 x−1

f(−1)=4, and f(5)=1

Passes through (2,4) and (4,10)

y=3x−2

Passes through (1,5) and (4,11)

Passes through (−1,4) and (5,2)

y=− 1 3 x+ 11 3

Passes through (−2,8) and (4,6)

*x* intercept at (−2,0) and *y* intercept at (0,−3)

y=−1.5x−3

*x* intercept at (−5,0) and *y* intercept at (0,4)

For the following exercises, determine whether the lines given by the
equations below are parallel, perpendicular, or neither.

4x−7y=10 7x+4y=1

perpendicular

3y+x=12 −y=8x+1

3y+4x=12 −6y=8x+1

parallel

6x−9y=10 3x+2y=1

For the following exercises, find the *x*- and *y-*intercepts of each
equation.

f( x )=−x+2

f(0)=−(0)+2 f(0)=2 y−int:(0,2) 0=−x+2 x−int:(2,0)

g( x )=2x+4

h( x )=3x−5

h(0)=3(0)−5 h(0)=−5 y−int:(0,−5) 0=3x−5 x−int:( 5 3 ,0 )

k( x )=−5x+1

−2x+5y=20

−2x+5y=20 −2(0)+5y=20 5y=20 y=4 y−int:(0,4) −2x+5(0)=20 x=−10
x−int:(−10,0)

7x+2y=56

For the following exercises, use the descriptions of each pair of lines
given below to find the slopes of Line 1 and Line 2. Is each pair of
lines parallel, perpendicular, or neither?

Line 1: Passes through (0,6) and (3,−24)

Line 2: Passes through (−1,19) and (8,−71)

Line 1: *m* = --10 Line 2: *m* = --10 Parallel

Line 1: Passes through (−8,−55) and (10,89)

Line 2: Passes through (9,−44) and (4,−14)

Line 1: Passes through (2,3) and (4,−1)

Line 2: Passes through (6,3) and (8,5)

Line 1: *m* = --2 Line 2: *m* = 1 Neither

Line 1: Passes through (1,7) and (5,5)

Line 2: Passes through (−1,−3) and (1,1)

Line 1: Passes through (2,5) and (5,−1)

Line 2: Passes through (−3,7) and (3,−5)

Line 1: m=--2   Line 2: m=--2   Parallel

For the following exercises, write an equation for the line described.

Write an equation for a line parallel to f( x )=−5x−3 and passing
through the point (2,--12).

Write an equation for a line parallel to g(x)=3x−1 and passing through
the point (4,9).

y=3x−3

Write an equation for a line perpendicular to h(t)=−2t+4 and passing
through the point (−4,--1).

Write an equation for a line perpendicular to p(t)=3t+4 and passing
through the point (3,1).

y=− 1 3 t+2

## Graphical {#fs-id2261328}

For the following exercises, find the slope of the line graphed.

0

For the following exercises, write an equation for the line graphed.

y=− 5 4 x+5

y=3x−1

y=−2.5

For the following exercises, match the given linear equation with its
graph in [\#](#).

<figure id="CNX_Precalc_Figure_04_01_210">

</figure>

f( x )=−x−1

f( x )=−3x−1

F

f( x )=− 1 2 x−1

f( x )=2

C

f( x )=2+x

f( x )=3x+2

A

For the following exercises, sketch a line with the given features.

An *x*-intercept of (--4,0) and *y*-intercept of (0,--2)

An *x*-intercept (--2,0) and *y*-intercept of (0,4)

A *y*-intercept of (0,7) and slope − 3 2

A *y*-intercept of (0,3) and slope 2 5

Passing through the points (--6,--2) and (6,--6)

Passing through the points (--3,--4) and (3,0)

For the following exercises, sketch the graph of each equation.

f( x )=−2x−1

f( x )=−3x+2

f( x )= 1 3 x+2

f( x )= 2 3 x−3

f( t )=3+2t

p( t )=−2+3t

x=3

x=−2

r( x )=4

For the following exercises, write the equation of the line shown in the
graph.

y=3

x=−3

## Numeric {#fs-id1979221}

For the following exercises, which of the tables could represent a
linear function? For each that could be linear, find a linear equation
that models the data.

  -------- --- ------ ------ ------
  x        0   5      10     15
  g( x )   5   --10   --25   --40
  -------- --- ------ ------ ------

Linear, g(x)=−3x+5

  -------- --- ---- ----- -----
  x        0   5    10    15
  h( x )   5   30   105   230
  -------- --- ---- ----- -----

  -------- ----- ---- ---- ----
  x        0     5    10   15
  f( x )   --5   20   45   70
  -------- ----- ---- ---- ----

Linear, f(x)=5x−5

  -------- ---- ---- ---- ----
  x        5    10   20   25
  k( x )   13   28   58   73
  -------- ---- ---- ---- ----

  -------- --- ------ ------ ------
  x        0   2      4      6
  g( x )   6   --19   --44   --69
  -------- --- ------ ------ ------

Linear, g(x)=− 25 2 x+6

  -------- ---- ---- ---- ----
  x        2    4    8    10
  h( x )   13   23   43   53
  -------- ---- ---- ---- ----

  -------- ----- ---- ---- ----
  x        2     4    6    8
  f( x )   --4   16   36   56
  -------- ----- ---- ---- ----

Linear, f(x)=10x−24

  -------- --- ---- ----- -----
  x        0   2    6     8
  k( x )   6   31   106   231
  -------- --- ---- ----- -----

## Technology {#fs-id2353110}

For the following exercises, use a calculator or graphing technology to
complete the task.

If f is a linear function, f(0.1)=11.5 , and f(0.4)=--5.9 , find an
equation for the function.

f(x)=−58x+17.3

Graph the function f on a domain of \[--10,10\]:f(x)=0.02x−0.01. Enter
the function in a graphing utility. For the viewing window, set the
minimum value of x to be −10 and the maximum value of x to be 10 .

Graph the function f on a domain of \[--10,10\]:fx)=2,500x+4,000

[\#](#) shows the input, w, and output, k, for a linear function k.
ⓐFill in the missing values of the table. ⓑWrite the linear function k,
round to 3 decimal places.

  --- ------ ------ ------ ------
  w   --10   5.5    67.5   *b*
  k   30     --26   *a*    --44
  --- ------ ------ ------ ------

[\#](#) shows the input, p, and output, q, for a linear function q.
ⓐFill in the missing values of the table. ⓑWrite the linear function k.

  --- ----- ----- ----- -----------
  p   0.5   0.8   12    *b*
  q   400   700   *a*   1,000,000
  --- ----- ----- ----- -----------

ⓐ a=11,900, b=1000.1 ⓑ q(p)=1000p --100

Graph the linear function f on a domain of \[ −10,10 \] for the function
whose slope is 1 8 and *y*-intercept is 31 16 . Label the points for the
input values of −10 and 10.

Graph the linear function f on a domain of \[ −0.1,0.1 \] for the
function whose slope is 75 and *y*-intercept is −22.5. Label the points
for the input values of −0.1 and 0.1.

Graph the linear function f where f( x )=ax+b on the same set of axes on
a domain of \[ −4,4 \] for the following values of a and b.

ⓐ

a

=

2

;

b

=

3

ⓑ

a

=

2

;

b

=

4

ⓒ

a

=

2

;

b

=

--4

ⓓ

a

=

2

;

b

=

--5

## Extensions {#fs-id2266929}

Find the value of x if a linear function goes through the following
points and has the following slope: (x,2),(−4,6),m=3

y=− 16 3

Find the value of *y* if a linear function goes through the following
points and has the following slope: (10,y),(25,100),m=−5

Find the equation of the line that passes through the following points:

( a,b ) and ( a,b+1 )

x=a

Find the equation of the line that passes through the following points:

(2a,b) and (a,b+1)

Find the equation of the line that passes through the following points:

(a,0) and (c,d)

y= d c--a x-- ad c--a

Find the equation of the line parallel to the line g( x )=−0.01x+2.01
through the point (1,2).

Find the equation of the line perpendicular to the line g( x
)=−0.01x+2.01 through the point (1,2).

y=100x--98

For the following exercises, use the functions f( x )=−0.1x+200 and g( x
)=20x+0.1.

Find the point of intersection of the lines f and g.

Where is f( x ) greater than g( x )? Where is g( x ) greater than f( x
)?

x\< 1999 201 , x\> 1999 201

## Real-World Applications {#fs-id2393754}

At noon, a barista notices that they have \$20 in their tip jar. If the
barista makes an average of \$0.50 from each customer, how much will
they have in the tip jar if they serve n more customers during the
shift?

A gym membership with two personal training sessions costs \$125, while
gym membership with five personal training sessions costs \$260. What is
cost per session?

\$45 per training session.

A clothing business finds there is a linear relationship between the
number of shirts, n, it can sell and the price, p, it can charge per
shirt. In particular, historical data shows that 1,000 shirts can be
sold at a price of \$30, while 3,000 shirts can be sold at a price of
\$22. Find a linear equation in the form p(n)=mn+b that gives the price
p they can charge for n shirts.

A phone company charges for service according to the formula:
C(n)=24+0.1n, where n is the number of minutes talked, and C(n) is the
monthly charge, in dollars. Find and interpret the rate of change and
initial value.

The rate of change is 0.1. For every additional minute talked, the
monthly charge increases by \$0.1 or 10 cents. The initial value is 24.
When there are no minutes talked, initially the charge is \$24.

A farmer finds there is a linear relationship between the number of bean
stalks, n, she plants and the yield, y, each plant produces. When she
plants 30 stalks, each plant yields 30 oz of beans. When she plants 34
stalks, each plant produces 28 oz of beans. Find a linear relationships
in the form y=mn+b that gives the yield when n stalks are planted.

A city's population in the year 1960 was 287,500. In 1989 the population
was 275,900. Compute the rate of growth of the population and make a
statement about the population rate of change in people per year.

The slope is --400. this means for every year between 1960 and 1989, the
population dropped by 400 per year in the city.

A town's population has been growing linearly. In 2003, the population
was 45,000, and the population has been growing by 1,700 people each
year. Write an equation, P(t), for the population t years after 2003.

Suppose that average annual income (in dollars) for the years 1990
through 1999 is given by the linear function: I(x)=1054x+23,286 , where
x is the number of years after 1990. Which of the following interprets
the slope in the context of the problem?

ⓐ

As of 1990, average annual income was \$23,286.

ⓑ

In the ten-year period from 1990--1999, average annual income increased
by a total of \$1,054.

ⓒ

Each year in the decade of the 1990s, average annual income increased by
\$1,054.

ⓓ

Average annual income rose to a level of \$23,286 by the end of 1999.

C

When temperature is 0 degrees Celsius, the Fahrenheit temperature is 32.
When the Celsius temperature is 100, the corresponding Fahrenheit
temperature is 212. Express the Fahrenheit temperature as a linear
function of C, the Celsius temperature, F( C ).

ⓐ

Find the rate of change of Fahrenheit temperature for each unit change
temperature of Celsius.

ⓑ

Find and interpret

F

(

28

)

.

ⓒ

Find and interpret

F

(

--40

)

.

# 

decreasing linear function

a function with a negative slope: If

f

(

x

)

=

m

x

\+

b

,

then

m

\<

0

horizontal line

a line defined by

f

(

x

)

=

b

,

where

b

is a real number. The slope of a horizontal line is 0.

increasing linear function

a function with a positive slope: If

f

(

x

)

=

m

x

\+

b

,

then

m

\>

0\.

linear function

a function with a constant rate of change that is a polynomial of degree
1, and whose graph is a straight line

parallel lines

two or more lines with the same slope

perpendicular lines

two lines that intersect at right angles and have slopes that are
negative reciprocals of each other

point-slope form

the equation for a line that represents a linear function of the form

y

−

y

1

=

m

(

x

−

x

1

)

slope

the ratio of the change in output values to the change in input values;
a measure of the steepness of a line

slope-intercept form

the equation for a line that represents a linear function in the form

f

(

x

)

=

m

x

\+

b

vertical line

a line defined by

x

=

a

,

where

a

is a real number. The slope of a vertical line is undefined.

[^1]: http://www.chinahighlights.com/shanghai/transportation/maglev-train.htm

[^2]: http://www.cbsnews.com/8301-501465_162-57400228-501465/teens-are-sending-60-texts-a-day-study-says/
