m51271

> In this section, you will:
>
> Build linear models from verbal descriptions.
>
> Model a set of data with a linear function.

dcf784dc-acd1-46a8-b5b0-cd5d8673b83a

#  {#eip-59}

## Learning Objectives {#eip-87}

Graph and interpret applications of slope--intercept form of a linear
function. (IA 3.2.5)

## Objective 1: Graph and interpret applications of slope--intercept form of a linear function. (IA 3.2.5) {#eip-857}

### Graph and Interpret Applications of Slope--Intercept form of linear equations. {#eip-373}

Many real-world applications are modeled by linear functions. We will
take a look at a few applications here so you can see how equations
written in slope--intercept form describe real world situations.

Usually, when a linear function uses real-world data, different letters
are used to represent the variables, instead of using only x and y . The
variables used remind us of what quantities are being measured.

Also, we often will need to adjust the axes in our rectangular
coordinate system to different scales to accommodate the data in the
application. Since many applications have both independent and dependent
variables that are positive our graphs will lie primarily in Quadrant I.

### Linear Functions {#eip-457}

A linear function is a function whose graph is a line. Linear functions
can be written in the *slope-intercept* form of a line

f(x)=mx+b

where *b* is the initial or starting value of the function (when input,
*x*=0), and *m* is the constant rate of change, or slope of the
function. The *y*-intercept is at (0,*b*),

m=slope= change in outputchange in input=∆y∆x= y2-y1x2-x1 =
f(x2)-f(x1)x2-x1=riserun .

When interpreting slope, it will be important to consider the units of
measurement. Make sure to always attach these units to both the
numerator and denominator when they are provided to you.

::: {#eip-777 .example}
The equation F=95C+32 is used to convert temperatures, *C,* on the
Celsius scale to temperatures, *F*, on the Fahrenheit scale.

ⓐ Find the Fahrenheit temperature for a Celsius temperature of 0.

ⓑ Find the Fahrenheit temperature for a Celsius temperature of 20.

ⓒ Interpret the slope and *F*-intercept of the equation.

ⓓ Graph the equation.

ⓐ Find the Fahrenheit temperature for a Celsius temperature of
0.F=95C+32FindFwhenC=0.F=95(0)+32Simplify.F=32

ⓑ Find the Fahrenheit temperature for a Celsius temperature of
20.F=95C+32FindFwhenC=20.F=95(20)+32Simplify.F=36+32Simplify.F=68 ⓒ

Interpret the slope and *F*-intercept of the equation. Even though this
equation uses *F* and *C*, it is still in slope--intercept form. The
slope, 95, means that the temperature Fahrenheit (*F*) increases 9
degrees when the temperature Celsius (*C*) increases 5 degrees. The
*F*-intercept means that when the temperature is 0° on the Celsius
scale, it is 32° on the Fahrenheit scale.

ⓓ Graph the equation. We'll need to use a larger scale than our usual.
Start at the *F*-intercept (0,32) , and then count out the rise of 9 and
the run of 5 to get a second point as shown in the graph.
:::

### Practice Makes Perfect {#eip-117}

Graph and interpret applications of slope--intercept form of a linear
function.

Janis is planning to rent a car while on vacation. The equation
C(m)=.25m+10 models the relationship between the cost in dollars, C, per
day and the number of miles,m, she drives in one day.

ⓐ Find the cost if Janis drives the car 20 miles one day.

ⓑ Find the cost on a day when Janis drives the car 400 miles.

ⓒ Interpret the slope and y-intercept (or C intercept) of the equation
in terms of the variables and units used in this problem.

ⓓ Graph the linear function below. Be sure to show the scale you are
using on your coordinate system.

A function that will convert women's dress sizes in the US, x, to dress
sizes in Italy, I(x), is given by:

I(x)=2(x+10)

ⓐ

  **x*, US women's size*   I(x)=2(x+10) *Italian women's size*
  ------------------------ -------------------------------------
  4                        
  10                       
  16                       

ⓑ Interpret the slope and y-intercept (or I intercept) for this linear
function in terms of the variables used in the problem.

ⓒ Graph the function below. Be sure to show the scale you are using.

Edwin pays a monthly fee for water service on his apartment of \$18 plus
an additional \$0.30 for each HCF (hundred cubic feet) of water used.

ⓐ Write a cost function, C(w), which will give his monthly cost as a
function of water used, w, in hundred cubic feet.

ⓑ

  *w* (in HCF)   *C(w)* (in \$)
  -------------- ----------------
  65             
  80             

ⓒ On a certain month Edwin's bill seems high at \$50. How many HCF's of
water did Edwin use that month.

ⓓ Graph the function below. Be sure to show the scale you are using.

Cassandra is a botanist who is studying the growth of pea plants under a
variety of conditions. One experiment yields the following results. For
a seedling starting off at 3 inches the growth rate each week 1.25
inches.

ⓐWrite a height function, H(t), which will give the plant height as a
function of time in weeks, t.

ⓑ Estimate the plant height for each of the following amounts of time
paying attention to units provided.

  t           H(t)
  ----------- ------
  7 days      
  14 days     
  2.5 weeks   

ⓒ Her plants will need to be secured to a stick when they reach 12
inches in height. Estimate the time when her samples will need to be
secured.

ⓓ Graph the function below. Be sure to show the scale you are using.

<figure id="Figure_04_02_001">

</figure>

Elan is a college student who plans to spend a summer in Seattle. Elan
has saved \$3,500 for their trip and anticipates spending \$400 each
week on rent, food, and activities. How can we write a linear model to
represent this situation? What would be the *x*-intercept, and what can
Elan learn from it? To answer these and related questions, we can create
a model using a linear function. Models such as this one can be
extremely useful for analyzing relationships and making predictions
based on those relationships. In this section, we will explore examples
of linear function models.

# Building Linear Models from Verbal Descriptions {#fs-id2476683}

When building linear models to solve problems involving quantities with
a constant rate of change, we typically follow the same problem
strategies that we would use for any type of function. Let's briefly
review them:

Identify changing quantities, and then define descriptive variables to
represent those quantities. When appropriate, sketch a picture or define
a coordinate system.

Carefully read the problem to identify important information. Look for
information that provides values for the variables or values for parts
of the functional model, such as slope and initial value.

Carefully read the problem to determine what we are trying to find,
identify, solve, or interpret.

Identify a solution pathway from the provided information to what we are
trying to find. Often this will involve checking and tracking units,
building a table, or even finding a formula for the function being used
to model the problem.

When needed, write a formula for the function.

Solve or evaluate the function using the formula.

Reflect on whether your answer is reasonable for the given situation and
whether it makes sense mathematically.

Clearly convey your result using appropriate units, and answer in full
sentences when necessary.

Now let's take a look at the student in Seattle. In Elan's situation,
there are two changing quantities: time and money. The amount of money
they have remaining while on vacation depends on how long they stay. We
can use this information to define our variables, including units.

$$\begin{array}{l}
{\text{Output:}\mspace{9mu} M,\text{money~remaining,~in~dollars}} \\
{\text{Input:}\mspace{9mu} t,\text{time,~in~weeks}}
\end{array}$$

So, the amount of money remaining depends on the number of weeks: M( t )
.

$$\begin{array}{l}
{\text{We~can~also~identify~the~initial~value~and~the~rate~of~change}.} \\
{\mspace{9mu}\text{~~~~~~~~~~~~Initial~Value:~She~saved~\$3,500,~so~\$3,500~is~the~initial~value~for}\mspace{9mu} M.} \\
{\mspace{9mu}\text{~~~~~~~~~~~~Rate~of~Change:~She~anticipates~spending~\$400~each~week,~so} - \text{\$400~per~week~is~the~rate~of~change,~or~slope}.}
\end{array}$$

Notice that the unit of dollars per week matches the unit of our output
variable divided by our input variable. Also, because the slope is
negative, the linear function is decreasing. This should make sense
because she is spending money each week.

The rate of change is constant, so we can start with the linear model M(
t )=mt+b. Then we can substitute the intercept and slope provided.

To find the *t-*intercept (horizontal axis intercept), we set the output
to zero, and solve for the input.

$$\begin{array}{ccl}
0 & = & {-400t + 3500} \\
t & = & \frac{3500}{400} \\
 & = & 8.75
\end{array}$$

The *t*-intercept (horizontal axis intercept) is 8.75 weeks. Because
this represents the input value when the output will be zero, we could
say that Elan will have no money left after 8.75 weeks.

When modeling any real-life scenario with functions, there is typically
a limited domain over which that model will be valid---almost no trend
continues indefinitely. Here the domain refers to the number of weeks.
In this case, it doesn't make sense to talk about input values less than
zero. A negative input value could refer to a number of weeks before
Elan saved \$3,500, but the scenario discussed poses the question once
they saved \$3,500 because this is when the trip and subsequent spending
starts. It is also likely that this model is not valid after the
*t*-intercept (horizontal axis intercept), unless Elan uses a credit
card and goes into debt. The domain represents the set of input values,
so the reasonable domain for this function is 0≤t≤8.75.

In this example, we were given a written description of the situation.
We followed the steps of modeling a problem to analyze the information.
However, the information provided may not always be the same. Sometimes
we might be provided with an intercept. Other times we might be provided
with an output value. We must be careful to analyze the information we
are given, and use it appropriately to build a linear model.

## Using a Given Intercept to Build a Model {#fs-id1724612}

Some real-world problems provide the vertical axis intercept, which is
the constant or initial value. Once the vertical axis intercept is
known, the *t*-intercept (horizontal axis intercept) can be calculated.
Suppose, for example, that Hannah plans to pay off a no-interest loan
from her parents. Her loan balance is \$1,000. She plans to pay \$250
per month until her balance is \$0. The *y*-intercept is the initial
amount of her debt, or \$1,000. The rate of change, or slope, is -\$250
per month. We can then use the slope-intercept form and the given
information to develop a linear model.

$$\begin{array}{ccl}
{f(x)} & = & {mx + b} \\
 & = & {-250x + 1000}
\end{array}$$

Now we can set the function equal to 0, and solve for x to find the
*x*-intercept.

$$\begin{array}{rcl}
0 & = & {-250x + 1000} \\
1000 & = & {250x} \\
4 & = & x \\
x & = & 4
\end{array}$$

The *x*-intercept is the number of months it takes her to reach a
balance of \$0. The *x*-intercept is 4 months, so it will take Hannah
four months to pay off her loan.

## Using a Given Input and Output to Build a Model {#fs-id2568391}

Many real-world applications are not as direct as the ones we just
considered. Instead they require us to identify some aspect of a linear
function. We might sometimes instead be asked to evaluate the linear
model at a given input or set the equation of the linear model equal to
a specified output.

:::: {#fs-id1841313 .note}
::: title
:::

How To

*Given a word problem that includes two pairs of input and output
values, use the linear function to solve a problem.*

Identify the input and output values.

Convert the data to two coordinate pairs.

Find the slope.

Write the linear model.

Use the model to make a prediction by evaluating the function at a given

x

-value.

Use the model to identify an

x

-value that results in a given

y

-value.

Answer the question posed.
::::

::: {#Example_04_02_01 .example}
A town's population has been growing linearly. In 2004, the population
was 6,200. By 2009, the population had grown to 8,100. Assume this trend
continues.

ⓐ

Predict the population in 2013.

ⓑ

Identify the year in which the population will reach 15,000.

The two changing quantities are the population size and time. While we
could use the actual year value as the input quantity, doing so tends to
lead to very cumbersome equations because the *y*-intercept would
correspond to the year 0, more than 2000 years ago!

To make computation a little nicer, we will define our input as the
number of years since 2004.

$$\begin{array}{l}
 \\
\begin{array}{l}
{\text{Input:}\mspace{9mu} t,\text{years~since~2004}} \\
{\text{Output:}\mspace{9mu} P(t),\text{the~town’s~population}}
\end{array}
\end{array}$$

To predict the population in 2013 ( t=9 ), we would first need an
equation for the population. Likewise, to find when the population would
reach 15,000, we would need to solve for the input that would provide an
output of 15,000. To write an equation, we need the initial value and
the rate of change, or slope.

To determine the rate of change, we will use the change in output per
change in input.

$$m = \frac{\text{change~in~output}}{\text{change~in~input}}$$

The problem gives us two input-output pairs. Converting them to match
our defined variables, the year 2004 would correspond to t=0, giving the
point ( 0,6200 ). Notice that through our clever choice of variable
definition, we have "given" ourselves the *y*-intercept of the function.
The year 2009 would correspond to t=5, giving the point (5,8100).

The two coordinate pairs are ( 0,6200 ) and ( 5,8100 ). Recall that we
encountered examples in which we were provided two points earlier in the
chapter. We can use these values to calculate the slope.

$$\begin{array}{ccl}
m & = & \frac{8100 - 6200}{5 - 0} \\
 & = & \frac{1900}{5} \\
 & = & {380\mspace{9mu}\text{people~per~year}}
\end{array}$$

We already know the *y*-intercept of the line, so we can immediately
write the equation:

$$P(t) = 380t + 6200$$

To predict the population in 2013, we evaluate our function at t=9.

$$\begin{array}{ccl}
{P(9)} & = & {380(9) + 6,200} \\
 & = & 9,620
\end{array}$$

If the trend continues, our model predicts a population of 9,620 in
2013.

To find when the population will reach 15,000, we can set P(t)=15000 and
solve for t.

$$\begin{array}{rcl}
15000 & = & {380t + 6200} \\
8800 & = & {380t} \\
t & \approx & 23.158
\end{array}$$

Our model predicts the population will reach 15,000 in a little more
than 23 years after 2004, or somewhere around the year 2027.
:::

:::: {#fs-id1167337081363 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

A company sells doughnuts. They incur a fixed cost of \$25,000 for rent,
insurance, and other expenses. It costs \$0.25 to produce each doughnut.

ⓐ Write a linear model to represent the cost C of the company as a
function of x, the number of doughnuts produced. ⓑ Find and interpret
the *y*-intercept.

ⓐ C( x )=0.25x+25,000 ⓑ The *y*-intercept is (0,25,000) . If the company
does not produce a single doughnut, they still incur a cost of \$25,000.
::::

:::: {#fs-id2065536 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

A city's population has been growing linearly. In 2008, the population
was 28,200. By 2012, the population was 36,800. Assume this trend
continues.

ⓐ

Predict the population in 2014.

ⓑ

Identify the year in which the population will reach 54,000.

ⓐ41,100 ⓑ2020
::::

## Using a Diagram to Build a Model {#fs-id1275258}

It is useful for many real-world applications to draw a picture to gain
a sense of how the variables representing the input and output may be
used to answer a question. To draw the picture, first consider what the
problem is asking for. Then, determine the input and the output. The
diagram should relate the variables. Often, geometrical shapes or
figures are drawn. Distances are often traced out. If a right triangle
is sketched, the Pythagorean Theorem relates the sides. If a rectangle
is sketched, labeling width and height is helpful.

::: {#Example_04_02_02 .example}
Anna and Emanuel start at the same intersection. Anna walks east at 4
miles per hour while Emanuel walks south at 3 miles per hour. They are
communicating with a two-way radio that has a range of 2 miles. How long
after they start walking will they fall out of radio contact?

In essence, we can partially answer this question by saying they will
fall out of radio contact when they are 2 miles apart, which leads us to
ask a new question:

\"How long will it take them to be 2 miles apart\"?

In this problem, our changing quantities are time and position, but
ultimately we need to know how long will it take for them to be 2 miles
apart. We can see that time will be our input variable, so we'll define
our input and output variables.

$$\begin{array}{l}
 \\
\begin{array}{l}
{\text{Input:}\mspace{9mu} t,\text{time~in~hours}.} \\
{\text{Output:}\mspace{9mu} A(t),\text{distance~in~miles,~and}\mspace{9mu} E(t),\text{distance~in~miles}}
\end{array}
\end{array}$$

Because it is not obvious how to define our output variable, we'll start
by drawing a picture such as [\#](#).

<figure id="Figure_04_02_003">

</figure>

Initial Value: They both start at the same intersection so when t=0, the
distance traveled by each person should also be 0. Thus the initial
value for each is 0.

Rate of Change: Anna is walking 4 miles per hour and Emanuel is walking
3 miles per hour, which are both rates of change. The slope for A is 4
and the slope for E is 3.

Using those values, we can write formulas for the distance each person
has walked.

$$\begin{array}{rcl}
{A(t)} & = & {4t} \\
{E(t)} & = & {3t}
\end{array}$$

For this problem, the distances from the starting point are important.
To notate these, we can define a coordinate system, identifying the
"starting point" at the intersection where they both started. Then we
can use the variable, A, which we introduced above, to represent Anna's
position, and define it to be a measurement from the starting point in
the eastward direction. Likewise, can use the variable, E, to represent
Emanuel's position, measured from the starting point in the southward
direction. Note that in defining the coordinate system, we specified
both the starting point of the measurement and the direction of measure.

We can then define a third variable, D, to be the measurement of the
distance between Anna and Emanuel. Showing the variables on the diagram
is often helpful, as we can see from [\#](#).

Recall that we need to know how long it takes for D, the distance
between them, to equal 2 miles. Notice that for any given input t, the
outputs A(t),E(t), and D( t ) represent distances.

<figure id="Figure_04_02_004">

</figure>

[\#](#) shows us that we can use the Pythagorean Theorem because we have
drawn a right angle.

Using the Pythagorean Theorem, we get:

$$\begin{array}{cclc}
{D{(t)}^{2}} & = & {A{(t)}^{2} + E{(t)}^{2}} & \\
 & = & {{(4t)}^{2} + {(3t)}^{2}} & \\
 & = & {16t^{2} + 9t^{2}} & \\
 & = & {25t^{2}} & \\
{\mspace{9mu} D(t)} & = & {\pm \sqrt{25t^{2}}} & {\quad\text{Solve~for~}D(t)\mspace{9mu}\text{using~the~square~root.}} \\
 & = & \left. \pm 5 \middle| t \right| & 
\end{array}$$

In this scenario we are considering only positive values of t, so our
distance D( t ) will always be positive. We can simplify this answer to
D(t)=5t. This means that the distance between Anna and Emanuel is also a
linear function. Because D is a linear function, we can now answer the
question of when the distance between them will reach 2 miles. We will
set the output D(t)=2 and solve for t.

$$\begin{array}{rcl}
{D(t)} & = & 2 \\
{5t} & = & 2 \\
t & = & {\frac{2}{5} = 0.4}
\end{array}$$

They will fall out of radio contact in 0.4 hour, or 24 minutes.
:::

:::: {#fs-id2158634 .note}
::: title
:::

Q&A

*Should I draw diagrams when given information based on a geometric
shape?*

*Yes. Sketch the figure and label the quantities and unknowns on the
sketch.*
::::

::: {#Example_04_02_03 .example}
There is a straight road leading from the town of Westborough to
Agritown 30 miles east and 10 miles north. Partway down this road, it
junctions with a second road, perpendicular to the first, leading to the
town of Eastborough. If the town of Eastborough is located 20 miles
directly east of the town of Westborough, how far is the road junction
from Westborough?

It might help here to draw a picture of the situation. See [\#](#). It
would then be helpful to introduce a coordinate system. While we could
place the origin anywhere, placing it at Westborough seems convenient.
This puts Agritown at coordinates ( 30,10 ), and Eastborough at ( 20,0
).

<figure id="Figure_04_02_005">

</figure>

Using this point along with the origin, we can find the slope of the
line from Westborough to Agritown.

$$m = \frac{10 - 0}{30 - 0} = \frac{1}{3}$$

Now we can write an equation to describe the road from Westborough to
Agritown.

$$W(x) = \frac{1}{3}x$$

From this, we can determine the perpendicular road to Eastborough will
have slope m=--3. Because the town of Eastborough is at the point (20,
0), we can find the equation.

$$\begin{array}{rclc}
{E(x)} & = & {-3x + b} & \\
0 & = & {-3(20) + b} & {\quad\text{Substitute~}(20,0)\text{into~the~equation}.} \\
b & = & 60 & \\
{E(x)} & = & {-3x + 60} & 
\end{array}$$

We can now find the coordinates of the junction of the roads by finding
the intersection of these lines. Setting them equal,

$$\begin{array}{cclc}
{\mspace{9mu}\frac{1}{3}x} & = & {- 3x + 60} & \\
{\frac{10}{3}x} & = & 60 & \\
{~10x} & = & 180 & \\
x & = & 18 & {\qquad\text{Substitute~this~back~into~}W(x).} \\
y & = & {W(18)} & \\
 & = & {\frac{1}{3}(18)} & \\
 & = & 6 & 
\end{array}$$

The roads intersect at the point (18, 6). Using the distance formula, we
can now find the distance from Westborough to the junction.

$$\begin{array}{ccl}
\text{distance} & = & \sqrt{{(x_{2} - x_{1})}^{2} + {(y_{2} - y_{1})}^{2}} \\
 & = & \sqrt{{(18 - 0)}^{2} + {(6 - 0)}^{2}} \\
 & \approx & {\mspace{9mu} 18.974\mspace{9mu}\text{miles}}
\end{array}$$

One nice use of linear models is to take advantage of the fact that the
graphs of these functions are lines. This means real-world applications
discussing maps need linear functions to model the distances between
reference points.
:::

:::: {#fs-id1404608 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

There is a straight road leading from the town of Timpson to Ashburn 60
miles east and 12 miles north. Partway down the road, it junctions with
a second road, perpendicular to the first, leading to the town of
Garrison. If the town of Garrison is located 22 miles directly east of
the town of Timpson, how far is the road junction from Timpson?

21.57 miles
::::

# Modeling a Set of Data with Linear Functions {#fs-id1462093}

Real-world situations including two or more linear functions may be
modeled with a system of linear equations. Remember, when solving a
system of linear equations, we are looking for points the two lines have
in common. Typically, there are three types of answers possible, as
shown in [\#](#).

<figure id="Figure_04_02_006">

</figure>

:::: {#fs-id2243270 .note}
::: title
:::

How To

*Given a situation that represents a system of linear equations, write
the system of equations and identify the solution.*

Identify the input and output of each linear model.

Identify the slope and

y

-intercept of each linear model.

Find the solution by setting the two linear functions equal to another
and solving for

x

,

or find the point of intersection on a graph.
::::

::: {#Example_04_02_04 .example}
Jamal is choosing between two truck-rental companies. The first, Keep on
Trucking, Inc., charges an up-front fee of \$20, then 59 cents a mile.
The second, Move It Your Way, charges an up-front fee of \$16, then 63
cents a mile[^1]. When will Keep on Trucking, Inc. be the better choice
for Jamal?

The two important quantities in this problem are the cost and the number
of miles driven. Because we have two companies to consider, we will
define two functions in [\#](#).

+----------------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| Input          | d, distance driven in miles                         |
+----------------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| Outputs        | K(d): cost, in dollars, for renting from Keep on    |
|                | Trucking                                            |
|                |                                                     |
|                | M( d ) cost, in dollars, for renting from Move It   |
|                | Your Way                                            |
+----------------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| Initial Value  | Up-front fee: K( 0 )=20 and M( 0 )=16               |
+----------------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| Rate of Change | K(d)=\$0.59 /mile and P(d)=\$0.63 /mile             |
+----------------+-----------------------------------------------------+

A linear function is of the form f(x)=mx+b. Using the rates of change
and initial charges, we can write the equations

$$\begin{array}{rcl}
{K(d)} & = & {0.59d + 20} \\
{M(d)} & = & {0.63d + 16}
\end{array}$$

Using these equations, we can determine when Keep on Trucking, Inc.,
will be the better choice. Because all we have to make that decision
from is the costs, we are looking for when Move It Your Way, will cost
less, or when K(d)\<M(d). The solution pathway will lead us to find the
equations for the two functions, find the intersection, and then see
where the K( d ) function is smaller.

These graphs are sketched in [\#](#), with K( d ) in blue.

<figure id="Figure_04_02_007">

</figure>

To find the intersection, we set the equations equal and solve:

$$\begin{array}{rcl}
{K(d)} & = & {M(d)} \\
{0.59d + 20} & = & {0.63d + 16} \\
4 & = & {0.04d} \\
{\mspace{9mu} 100} & = & d \\
d & = & 100
\end{array}$$

This tells us that the cost from the two companies will be the same if
100 miles are driven. Either by looking at the graph, or noting that K(
d ) is growing at a slower rate, we can conclude that Keep on Trucking,
Inc. will be the cheaper price when more than 100 miles are driven, that
is d\>100 .
:::

:::: {#fs-id1542442 .note}
::: title
:::

Media

Access this online resource for additional instruction and practice with
linear function models.

Interpreting a Linear Function
::::

## Key Concepts {#fs-id1310885}

We can use the same problem strategies that we would use for any type of
function.

When modeling and solving a problem, identify the variables and look for
key values, including the slope and

y

-intercept. See

.

Draw a diagram, where appropriate. See

and

.

Check for reasonableness of the answer.

Linear models may be built by identifying or calculating the slope and
using the

y

-intercept.

The

x

-intercept may be found by setting

y

=

0

,

which is setting the expression

m

x

\+

b

equal to 0.

The point of intersection of a system of linear equations is the point
where the

x

\- and

y

-values are the same. See

.

A graph of the system may be used to identify the points where one line
falls below (or above) the other line.

# Section Exercises {#fs-id1853050}

## Verbal {#fs-id2040608}

Explain how to find the input variable in a word problem that uses a
linear function.

Determine the independent variable. This is the variable upon which the
output depends.

Explain how to find the output variable in a word problem that uses a
linear function.

Explain how to interpret the initial value in a word problem that uses a
linear function.

To determine the initial value, find the output when the input is equal
to zero.

Explain how to determine the slope in a word problem that uses a linear
function.

## Algebraic {#fs-id1605116}

Find the area of a parallelogram bounded by the *y*-axis, the line x=3,
the line f(x)=1+2x, and the line parallel to f(x) passing through ( 2,7
).

6 square units

Find the area of a triangle bounded by the *x*-axis, the line f(x)=12--
1 3 x, and the line perpendicular to f(x) that passes through the
origin.

Find the area of a triangle bounded by the *y*-axis, the line f(x)=9-- 6
7 x, and the line perpendicular to f(x) that passes through the origin.

20.01 square units

Find the area of a parallelogram bounded by the *x*-axis, the line
g(x)=2, the line f(x)=3x, and the line parallel to f(x) passing through
(6,1).

For the following exercises, consider this scenario: A town's population
has been decreasing at a constant rate. In 2010 the population was
5,900. By 2012 the population had dropped to 4,700. Assume this trend
continues.

Predict the population in 2016.

2,300

Identify the year in which the population will reach 0.

For the following exercises, consider this scenario: A town's population
has been increased at a constant rate. In 2010 the population was
46,020. By 2012 the population had increased to 52,070. Assume this
trend continues.

Predict the population in 2016.

64,170

Identify the year in which the population will reach 75,000.

For the following exercises, consider this scenario: A town has an
initial population of 75,000. It grows at a constant rate of 2,500 per
year for 5 years.

Find the linear function that models the town's population P as a
function of the year, t, where t is the number of years since the model
began.

P( t )=75,000+2500t

Find a reasonable domain and range for the function P.

If the function P is graphed, find and interpret the *x*- and
*y*-intercepts.

(--30, 0) Thirty years before the start of this model, the town had no
citizens. (0, 75,000) Initially, the town had a population of 75,000.

If the function P is graphed, find and interpret the slope of the
function.

When will the population reach 100,000?

Ten years after the model began

What is the population in the year 12 years from the onset of the model?

For the following exercises, consider this scenario: The weight of a
newborn is 7.5 pounds. The baby gained one-half pound a month for its
first year.

Find the linear function that models the baby's weight W as a function
of the age of the baby, in months, t.

W(t)=0.5t+7.5

Find a reasonable domain and range for the function W.

If the function W is graphed, find and interpret the *x*- and
*y*-intercepts.

( −15,0 ) : The *x*-intercept is not a plausible set of data for this
model because it means the baby weighed 0 pounds 15 months prior to
birth. ( 0,7.5 ) : The baby weighed 7.5 pounds at birth.

If the function *W* is graphed, find and interpret the slope of the
function.

When did the baby weigh 10.4 pounds?

At age 5.8 months

What is the output when the input is 6.2?

For the following exercises, consider this scenario: The number of
people afflicted with the common cold in the winter months steadily
decreased by 205 each year from 2005 until 2010. In 2005, 12,025 people
were inflicted.

Find the linear function that models the number of people inflicted with
the common cold C as a function of the year, t.

C( t )=12,025−205t

Find a reasonable domain and range for the function C.

If the function C is graphed, find and interpret the *x*- and
*y*-intercepts.

( 58.7,0 ): In roughly 59 years, the number of people inflicted with the
common cold would be 0. ( 0,12,025 ) Initially there were 12,025 people
afflicted by the common cold.

If the function C is graphed, find and interpret the slope of the
function.

When will the number of people afflicted with the common cold reach 0?

2063

In what year will the number of people afflicted with the common cold be
9,700?

## Graphical {#fs-id2804361}

For the following exercises, use the graph in [\#](#), which shows the
profit, y, in thousands of dollars, of a company in a given year, t,
where t represents the number of years since 1980.

<figure id="Figure_04_02_201">

</figure>

Find the linear function y, where y depends on t, the number of years
since 1980.

y=−2t+180

Find and interpret the *y*-intercept.

Find and interpret the *x*-intercept.

In 2070, the company's profit will be zero.

Find and interpret the slope.

For the following exercises, use the graph in [\#](#), which shows the
profit, y, in thousands of dollars, of a company in a given year, t,
where t represents the number of years since 1980.

<figure id="Figure_04_02_202">

</figure>

Find the linear function y, where y depends on t, the number of years
since 1980.

y=30t−300

Find and interpret the *y*-intercept.

Find and interpret the *x*-intercept.

(10, 0) In the year 1990, the company's profits were zero

Find and interpret the slope.

## Numeric {#fs-id2458296}

For the following exercises, use the median home values in Mississippi
and Hawaii (adjusted for inflation) shown in [\#](#). Assume that the
house values are changing linearly.

  Year   Mississippi   Hawaii
  ------ ------------- -----------
  1950   \$25,200      \$74,400
  2000   \$71,400      \$272,700

In which state have home values increased at a higher rate?

Hawaii

If these trends were to continue, what would be the median home value in
Mississippi in 2010?

If we assume the linear trend existed before 1950 and continues after
2000, the two states' median house values will be (or were) equal in
what year? (The answer might be absurd.)

During the year 1933

For the following exercises, use the median home values in Indiana and
Alabama (adjusted for inflation) shown in [\#](#). Assume that the house
values are changing linearly.

  Year   Indiana    Alabama
  ------ ---------- ----------
  1950   \$37,700   \$27,100
  2000   \$94,300   \$85,100

In which state have home values increased at a higher rate?

If these trends were to continue, what would be the median home value in
Indiana in 2010?

\$105,620

If we assume the linear trend existed before 1950 and continues after
2000, the two states' median house values will be (or were) equal in
what year? (The answer might be absurd.)

## Real-World Applications {#fs-id2192834}

In 2004, a school population was 1001. By 2008 the population had grown
to 1697. Assume the population is changing linearly.

ⓐ

How much did the population grow between the year 2004 and 2008?

ⓑ

How long did it take the population to grow from 1001 students to 1697
students?

ⓒ

What is the average population growth per year?

ⓓ

What was the population in the year 2000?

ⓔ

Find an equation for the population,

P

,

of the school

t

years after 2000.

ⓕ

Using your equation, predict the population of the school in 2011.

ⓐ

696 people

ⓑ

4 years

ⓒ

174 people per year

ⓓ

305 people

ⓔ

P(t) = 305 + 174t

ⓕ

2,219 people

In 2003, a town's population was 1431. By 2007 the population had grown
to 2134. Assume the population is changing linearly.

ⓐ

How much did the population grow between the year 2003 and 2007?

ⓑ

How long did it take the population to grow from 1431 people to 2134
people?

ⓒ

What is the average population growth per year?

ⓓ

What was the population in the year 2000?

ⓔ

Find an equation for the population,

P

,

of the town

t

years after 2000.

ⓕ

Using your equation, predict the population of the town in 2014.

A phone company has a monthly cellular plan where a customer pays a flat
monthly fee and then a certain amount of money per minute used for voice
or video calling. If a customer uses 410 minutes, the monthly cost will
be \$71.50. If the customer uses 720 minutes, the monthly cost will be
\$118.

ⓐ

Find a linear equation for the monthly cost of the cell plan as a
function of

x

, the number of monthly minutes used.

ⓑ

Interpret the slope and

y

-intercept of the equation.

ⓒ

Use your equation to find the total monthly cost if 687 minutes are
used.

ⓐ

C(x) = 0.15x + 10

ⓑ

The flat monthly fee is \$10 and there is a \$0.15 fee for each
additional minute used

ⓒ

\$113.05

A phone company has a monthly cellular data plan where a customer pays a
flat monthly fee of \$10 and then a certain amount of money per megabyte
(MB) of data used on the phone. If a customer uses 20 MB, the monthly
cost will be \$11.20. If the customer uses 130 MB, the monthly cost will
be \$17.80.

ⓐ

Find a linear equation for the monthly cost of the data plan as a
function of

x

,

the number of MB used.

ⓑ

Interpret the slope and

y

-intercept of the equation.

ⓒ

Use your equation to find the total monthly cost if 250 MB are used.

In 1990, the moose population in a park was measured to be 4,360. By
1999, the population was measured again to be 5,880. Assume the
population continues to change linearly.

ⓐ

Find a formula for the moose population,

P

since 1991.

ⓑ

What does your model predict the moose population to be in 2003?

ⓐ P( t )=190t+4,360 ⓑ 6,640 moose

In 2003, the owl population in a park was measured to be 340. By 2007,
the population was measured again to be 285. The population changes
linearly. Let the input be years since 2003.

ⓐ

Find a formula for the owl population,

P

.

Let the input be years since 2003.

ⓑ

What does your model predict the owl population to be in 2012?

The Federal Helium Reserve held about 16 billion cubic feet of helium in
2010 and is being depleted by about 2.1 billion cubic feet each year.

ⓐ

Give a linear equation for the remaining federal helium reserves,

R

,

in terms of

t

,

the number of years since 2010.

ⓑ

In 2015, what will the helium reserves be?

ⓒ

If the rate of depletion doesn't change, in what year will the Federal
Helium Reserve be depleted?

ⓐ

R

(

t

)

=

−

2

.

1

t

\+

16

ⓑ

5.5 billion cubic feet

ⓒ

During the year 2017

Suppose the world's oil reserves in 2014 are 1,820 billion barrels. If,
on average, the total reserves are decreasing by 25 billion barrels of
oil each year:

ⓐ

Give a linear equation for the remaining oil reserves,

R

,

in terms of

t

,

the number of years since now.

ⓑ

Seven years from now, what will the oil reserves be?

ⓒ

If the rate at which the reserves are decreasing is constant, when will
the world's oil reserves be depleted?

You are choosing between two different prepaid cell phone plans. The
first plan charges a rate of 26 cents per minute. The second plan
charges a monthly fee of \$19.95 *plus* 11 cents per minute. How many
minutes would you have to use in a month in order for the second plan to
be preferable?

More than 133 minutes

You are choosing between two different window washing companies. The
first charges \$5 per window. The second charges a base fee of \$40 plus
\$3 per window. How many windows would you need to have for the second
company to be preferable?

When hired at a new job selling jewelry, you are given two pay options:

Option A: Base salary of \$17,000 a year with a commission of 12% of
your sales

Option B: Base salary of \$20,000 a year with a commission of 5% of your
sales

How much jewelry would you need to sell for option A to produce a larger
income?

More than \$42,857.14 worth of jewelry

When hired at a new job selling electronics, you are given two pay
options:

Option A: Base salary of \$14,000 a year with a commission of 10% of
your sales

Option B: Base salary of \$19,000 a year with a commission of 4% of your
sales

How much electronics would you need to sell for option A to produce a
larger income?

When hired at a new job selling electronics, you are given two pay
options:

Option A: Base salary of \$20,000 a year with a commission of 12% of
your sales

Option B: Base salary of \$26,000 a year with a commission of 3% of your
sales

How much electronics would you need to sell for option A to produce a
larger income?

More than \$66,666.67 in sales

When hired at a new job selling electronics, you are given two pay
options:

Option A: Base salary of \$10,000 a year with a commission of 9% of your
sales

Option B: Base salary of \$20,000 a year with a commission of 4% of your
sales

How much electronics would you need to sell for option A to produce a
larger income?

[^1]: Rates retrieved Aug 2, 2010 from http://www.budgettruck.com and
    http://www.uhaul.com/
