m51272

> In this section, you will:
>
> Draw and interpret scatter diagrams.
>
> Use a graphing utility to find the line of best fit.
>
> Distinguish between linear and nonlinear relations.
>
> Fit a regression line to a set of data and use the linear model to
> make predictions.

e9d5f844-6760-4f85-8f79-67292a6703dc

#  {#eip-334}

## Learning Objectives {#eip-762}

Plot points in a rectangular coordinate system (IA 3.1.1).

Find an equation of the line given two points (IA 3.3.3).

## Objectives: Plot points in a rectangular coordinate system (IA 3.1.1) and find an equation of the line given two points. (IA 3.3.3) {#eip-302}

In this section we will be plotting collections of data points and
looking for patterns in these data sets. A scatterplot is a collection
of points plotted on the same coordinate system. When trying to fit a
function to a data set it is important to note if there is a pattern to
the data set and whether that pattern is linear or nonlinear. If the
dependent variable increases as the independent variable increases, we
call this a positive association. If the dependent variable decreases as
the independent variable increases, we call this a negative association.

:::: {#fs-id1572652 .note}
::: title
:::

Plot points in a rectangular coordinate system, then find a line through
two of the data points.

A precalculus instructor is looking at a random sample of students to
see if there is a relationship between the number of hours spent working
in a homework platform for a given chapter, and the score for the
chapter exam.

  ------------------------------- ----
  Hours spent doing homework, x   10
  Exam score, y                   72
  ------------------------------- ----

ⓐ Plot each of the data points on a coordinate system below. You may
either plot the points by hand or using a graphing utility. Be sure to
label your x and y axes.

ⓑ Observe any patterns in the data points. Do you think the association
between the variables is positive or negative? Is the pattern linear or
nonlinear?

ⓒ What would you suggest to a friend enrolled in this course based on
the data set you graphed?

ⓓ Choose two points that seem to represent the general pattern in the
data set. Write these points as ordered pairs below. (,) (,)

ⓔ Find the slope of a line passing through these two points. Interpret
its value in terms of the variables being measured. m=y2-y1x2-x1=

ⓕUse point-slope form or slope intercept form to write the equation of
the line passing through these data points. y--y1=m(x--x1) or y=mx+b

ⓖ Write this equation in slope-intercept form. y=mx+b

ⓗ Rewrite this equation using function notation. f(x)=

ⓘ This equation is a linear model. Sketch the line on the graph created
in part a.

ⓙ Use this mathematical linear model to predict the exam score for a
student who spent 15 hours working on this chapter in their homework
system. Show your work below.
::::

### Practice Makes Perfect {#eip-290}

The data below shows the relationship between the mass of an automobile
(measured in kg) and the fuel efficiency of the car (measured in miles
per gallon) for 7 automobiles.

  -------------------------- ------
  Mass (kg), x               1305
  Fuel Efficiency (MPG), y   27
  -------------------------- ------

ⓐ Draw a scatter plot (by hand or using a graphing utility) for the data
provided being sure to label your axes.

ⓑ Does the data appear to be linearly related? Is the association
between the variables positive or negative?

ⓒ Choose two points that seem to represent the general pattern in the
data set. Write these points as ordered pairs below. (,) (,)

ⓓ Write the equation of the line passing through the points you listed
in part c. in slope intercept form. Show your work below.

ⓔ Use the linear function you found in part d. to predict the fuel
efficiency of an Audi A5 Quattro whose mass is 1610 kg.

The data set below shows the relationship between the number of hours
worked and the tips received by Nyla, a server at Pi Pizzeria.

  --------------------------- ------
  Hours worked in a week, x   10
  Tips received, y            \$66
  --------------------------- ------

ⓐ Draw a scatter plot (by hand or using a graphing utility) for the data
provided being sure to label your axes.

ⓑ Does the data appear to be linearly related? Is the association
between the variables positive or negative?

ⓒ Choose two points that seem to represent the general pattern in the
data set. Write these points as ordered pairs below. (,) (,)

ⓓ Write the equation of the line passing through the points you listed
in part c. in slope intercept form. Show your work below.

ⓔ Based on the linear function you found in part d, how much could Nyla
expect to make in tips if they work 38 hours in a given week?

A professor is attempting to identify trends among final exam scores.
His class has a mixture of students, so he wonders if there is any
relationship between age and final exam scores. One way for him to
analyze the scores is by creating a diagram that relates the age of each
student to the exam score received. In this section, we will examine one
such diagram known as a scatter plot.

# Drawing and Interpreting Scatter Plots {#fs-id2188781}

A scatter plot is a graph of plotted points that may show a relationship
between two sets of data. If the relationship is from a linear model, or
a model that is nearly linear, the professor can draw conclusions using
his knowledge of linear functions. [\#](#) shows a sample scatter plot.

<figure id="Figure_04_03_001">

</figure>

Notice this scatter plot does *not* indicate a linear relationship. The
points do not appear to follow a trend. In other words, there does not
appear to be a relationship between the age of the student and the score
on the final exam.

::: {#Example_04_03_01 .example}
The table below shows the number of cricket chirps in 15 seconds, for
several different air temperatures, in degrees Fahrenheit[^1]. Plot this
data, and determine whether the data appears to be linearly related.

  --------------- ------ ------ ------ ---- ---- ---- ------ ------ ----
  *Chirps*        44     35     20.4   33   31   35   18.5   37     26
  *Temperature*   80.5   70.5   57     66   68   72   52     73.5   53
  --------------- ------ ------ ------ ---- ---- ---- ------ ------ ----

  : Cricket Chirps vs Air Temperature {#Table_04_03_01}

Plotting this data, as depicted in [\#](#) suggests that there may be a
trend. We can see from the trend in the data that the number of chirps
increases as the temperature increases. The trend appears to be roughly
linear, though certainly not perfectly so.

<figure id="Figure_04_03_002">

</figure>
:::

# Finding the Line of Best Fit {#fs-id2672477}

Once we recognize a need for a linear function to model that data, the
natural follow-up question is "what is that linear function?" One way to
approximate our linear function is to sketch the line that seems to best
fit the data. Then we can extend the line until we can verify the
*y*-intercept. We can approximate the slope of the line by extending it
until we can estimate the rise run .

::: {#Example_04_03_02 .example}
Find a linear function that fits the data in [\#](#) by "eyeballing" a
line that seems to fit.

On a graph, we could try sketching a line. Using the starting and ending
points of our hand drawn line, points (0, 30) and (50, 90), this graph
has a slope of

$$\begin{array}{rcl}
m & = & \frac{60}{50} \\
 & = & 1.2
\end{array}$$

and a *y*-intercept at 30. This gives an equation of

$$T(c) = 1.2c + 30$$

where c is the number of chirps in 15 seconds, and T( c ) is the
temperature in degrees Fahrenheit. The resulting equation is represented
in [\#](#).

<figure id="Figure_04_03_003">

</figure>

This linear equation can then be used to approximate answers to various
questions we might ask about the trend.
:::

## Recognizing Interpolation or Extrapolation {#fs-id1720372}

While the data for most examples does not fall perfectly on the line,
the equation is our best guess as to how the relationship will behave
outside of the values for which we have data. We use a process known as
*interpolation* when we predict a value inside the domain and range of
the data. The process of *extrapolation* is used when we predict a value
outside the domain and range of the data.

[\#](#) compares the two processes for the cricket-chirp data addressed
in [\#](#). We can see that interpolation would occur if we used our
model to predict temperature when the values for chirps are between 18.5
and 44. Extrapolation would occur if we used our model to predict
temperature when the values for chirps are less than 18.5 or greater
than 44.

There is a difference between making predictions inside the domain and
range of values for which we have data and outside that domain and
range. Predicting a value outside of the domain and range has its
limitations. When our model no longer applies after a certain point, it
is sometimes called model breakdown. For example, predicting a cost
function for a period of two years may involve examining the data where
the input is the time in years and the output is the cost. But if we try
to extrapolate a cost when x=50, that is in 50 years, the model would
not apply because we could not account for factors fifty years in the
future.

<figure id="Figure_04_03_004">

</figure>

:::: {#fs-id2570361 .note}
::: title
Interpolation and Extrapolation
:::

Different methods of making predictions are used to analyze data.

The method of interpolation involves predicting a value inside the
domain and/or range of the data. The method of extrapolation involves
predicting a value outside the domain and/or range of the data. Model
breakdown occurs at the point when the model no longer applies.
::::

::: {#Example_04_03_03 .example}
Use the cricket data from [\#](#) to answer the following questions:

ⓐ

Would predicting the temperature when crickets are chirping 30 times in
15 seconds be interpolation or extrapolation? Make the prediction, and
discuss whether it is reasonable.

ⓑ

Would predicting the number of chirps crickets will make at 40 degrees
be interpolation or extrapolation? Make the prediction, and discuss
whether it is reasonable.

ⓐ

The number of chirps in the data provided varied from 18.5 to 44. A
prediction at 30 chirps per 15 seconds is inside the domain of our data,
so would be interpolation. Using our model:

$$\begin{array}{ccl}
\text{T (30)} & = & \text{30 + 1.2(30)} \\
 & = & \text{66~degrees}
\end{array}$$

Based on the data we have, this value seems reasonable.

ⓑ

The temperature values varied from 52 to 80.5. Predicting the number of
chirps at 40 degrees is extrapolation because 40 is outside the range of
our data. Using our model:

$$\begin{array}{l}
{40 = 30 + 1.2c} \\
{10 = 1.2c} \\
{\mspace{9mu}\ c \approx 8.33}
\end{array}$$

We can compare the regions of interpolation and extrapolation using
[\#](#).

<figure id="Figure_04_03_005">

</figure>

Our model predicts the crickets would chirp 8.33 times in 15 seconds.
While this might be possible, we have no reason to believe our model is
valid outside the domain and range. In fact, generally crickets stop
chirping altogether below around 50 degrees.
:::

:::: {#fs-id2181223 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

According to the data from [\#](#), what temperature can we predict it
is if we counted 20 chirps in 15 seconds?

54°F
::::

## Finding the Line of Best Fit Using a Graphing Utility {#fs-id2064185}

While eyeballing a line works reasonably well, there are statistical
techniques for fitting a line to data that minimize the differences
between the line and data values[^2]. One such technique is called least
squares regression and can be computed by many graphing calculators,
spreadsheet software, statistical software, and many web-based
calculators[^3]. Least squares regression is one means to determine the
line that best fits the data, and here we will refer to this method as
linear regression.

:::: {#fs-id2627255 .note}
::: title
:::

How To

*Given data of input and corresponding outputs from a linear function,
find the best fit line using linear regression.*

Enter the input in List 1 (L1).

Enter the output in List 2 (L2).

On a graphing utility, select Linear Regression (LinReg).
::::

::: {#Example_04_03_04 .example}
Find the least squares regression line using the cricket-chirp data in
[\#](#).

Enter the input (chirps) in List 1 (L1).

Enter the output (temperature) in List 2 (L2). See

.

  ------ ------ ------ ------ ---- ---- ---- ------ ------ ----
  *L1*   44     35     20.4   33   31   35   18.5   37     26
  *L2*   80.5   70.5   57     66   68   72   52     73.5   53
  ------ ------ ------ ------ ---- ---- ---- ------ ------ ----

On a graphing utility, select Linear Regression (LinReg). Using the
cricket chirp data from earlier, with technology we obtain the equation:

$$T(c) = 30.281 + 1.143c$$

Notice that this line is quite similar to the equation we "eyeballed"
but should fit the data better. Notice also that using this equation
would change our prediction for the temperature when hearing 30 chirps
in 15 seconds from 66 degrees to:

$$\begin{array}{l}
{T(30) = 30.281 + 1.143(30)} \\
{\mspace{9mu}\text{~~~~~~~~} = 64.571} \\
{\mspace{9mu}\text{~~~~~~~~} \approx 64.6\mspace{9mu}\text{degrees}}
\end{array}$$

The graph of the scatter plot with the least squares regression line is
shown in [\#](#).

<figure id="Figure_04_03_006">

</figure>
:::

:::: {#fs-id1592598 .note}
::: title
:::

Q&A

*Will there ever be a case where two different lines will serve as the
best fit for the data?*

*No. There is only one best fit line.*
::::

# Distinguishing Between Linear and Nonlinear Models {#fs-id1459299}

As we saw above with the cricket-chirp model, some data exhibit strong
linear trends, but other data, like the final exam scores plotted by
age, are clearly nonlinear. Most calculators and computer software can
also provide us with the correlation coefficient, which is a measure of
how closely the line fits the data. Many graphing calculators require
the user to turn a \"diagnostic on\" selection to find the correlation
coefficient, which mathematicians label as r The correlation coefficient
provides an easy way to get an idea of how close to a line the data
falls.

We should compute the correlation coefficient only for data that follows
a linear pattern or to determine the degree to which a data set is
linear. If the data exhibits a nonlinear pattern, the correlation
coefficient for a linear regression is meaningless. To get a sense for
the relationship between the value of r and the graph of the data,
[\#](#) shows some large data sets with their correlation coefficients.
Remember, for all plots, the horizontal axis shows the input and the
vertical axis shows the output.

<figure id="Figure_04_03_007">

</figure>

:::: {#fs-id1415360 .note}
::: title
Correlation Coefficient
:::

The *correlation coefficient* is a value, r, between --1 and 1.

r

\>

0

suggests a positive (increasing) relationship

r

\<

0

suggests a negative (decreasing) relationship

The closer the value is to 0, the more scattered the data.

The closer the value is to 1 or --1, the less scattered the data is.
::::

::: {#Example_04_03_05 .example}
Calculate the correlation coefficient for cricket-chirp data in [\#](#).

Because the data appear to follow a linear pattern, we can use
technology to calculate r Enter the inputs and corresponding outputs and
select the Linear Regression. The calculator will also provide you with
the correlation coefficient, r=0.9509. This value is very close to 1,
which suggests a strong increasing linear relationship.

Note: For some calculators, the Diagnostics must be turned \"on\" in
order to get the correlation coefficient when linear regression is
performed: \[2nd\]\>\[0\]\>\[alpha\]\[x--1\], then scroll to
*DIAGNOSTICSON*.
:::

# Fitting a Regression Line to a Set of Data {#fs-id1840824}

Once we determine that a set of data is linear using the correlation
coefficient, we can use the regression line to make predictions. As we
learned above, a regression line is a line that is closest to the data
in the scatter plot, which means that only one such line is a best fit
for the data.

::: {#Example_04_03_06 .example}
Gasoline consumption in the United States has been steadily increasing.
Consumption data from 1994 to 2004 is shown in [\#](#).[^4] Determine
whether the trend is linear, and if so, find a model for the data. Use
the model to predict the consumption in 2008.

  ------------------------------------- ------ ------ ------ ------ ------ ------ ------ ------ ------ ------ ------
  *Year*                                \'94   \'95   \'96   \'97   \'98   \'99   \'00   \'01   \'02   \'03   \'04
  *Consumption (billions of gallons)*   113    116    118    119    123    125    126    128    131    133    136
  ------------------------------------- ------ ------ ------ ------ ------ ------ ------ ------ ------ ------ ------

The scatter plot of the data, including the least squares regression
line, is shown in [\#](#).

<figure id="Figure_04_03_008">

</figure>

We can introduce a new input variable, t, representing years since 1994.

The least squares regression equation is:

$$C(t) = 113.318 + 2.209t$$

Using technology, the correlation coefficient was calculated to be
0.9965, suggesting a very strong increasing linear trend.

Using this to predict consumption in 2008 (t=14),

$$\begin{array}{l}
{C(14) = 113.318 + 2.209(14)} \\
{\mspace{9mu}\text{~~~~~~~~} = 144.244}
\end{array}$$

The model predicts 144.244 billion gallons of gasoline consumption in
2008.
:::

:::: {#fs-id1799110 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Use the model we created using technology in [\#](#) to predict the gas
consumption in 2011. Is this an interpolation or an extrapolation?

150.871 billion gallons; extrapolation
::::

:::: {#fs-id1551115 .note}
::: title
:::

Media

Access these online resources for additional instruction and practice
with fitting linear models to data.

Introduction to Regression Analysis

Linear Regression
::::

# Key Concepts {#fs-id1486512}

Scatter plots show the relationship between two sets of data. See

.

Scatter plots may represent linear or non-linear models.

The line of best fit may be estimated or calculated, using a calculator
or statistical software. See

.

Interpolation can be used to predict values inside the domain and range
of the data, whereas extrapolation can be used to predict values outside
the domain and range of the data. See

.

The correlation coefficient,

r

,

indicates the degree of linear relationship between data. See

.

A regression line best fits the data. See

.

The least squares regression line is found by minimizing the squares of
the distances of points from a line passing through the data and may be
used to make predictions regarding either of the variables. See

.

# Section Exercises {#fs-id1799811}

## Verbal {#fs-id942179}

Describe what it means if there is a model breakdown when using a linear
model.

When our model no longer applies, after some value in the domain, the
model itself doesn't hold.

What is interpolation when using a linear model?

What is extrapolation when using a linear model?

We predict a value outside the domain and range of the data.

Explain the difference between a positive and a negative correlation
coefficient.

Explain how to interpret the absolute value of a correlation
coefficient.

The closer the number is to 1, the less scattered the data, the closer
the number is to 0, the more scattered the data.

## Algebraic {#fs-id1619206}

A regression was run to determine whether there is a relationship
between hours of TV watched per day (x) and number of sit-ups a person
can do (y). The results of the regression are given below. Use this to
predict the number of sit-ups a person who watches 11 hours of TV can
do.

$$\begin{array}{l}
{y = ax + b} \\
{a = -1.341} \\
{b = 32.234} \\
{\mspace{9mu} r = -0.896}
\end{array}$$

A regression was run to determine whether there is a relationship
between the diameter of a tree ( x , in inches) and the tree's age ( y ,
in years). The results of the regression are given below. Use this to
predict the age of a tree with diameter 10 inches.

$$\begin{array}{l}
{y = ax + b} \\
{a = 6.301} \\
{b = -1.044} \\
{\mspace{9mu} r = 0.970}
\end{array}$$

61.966 years

For the following exercises, draw a scatter plot for the data provided.
Does the data appear to be linearly related?

  ------ ------ ------ ------ ----- -----
  0      2      4      6      8     10
  --22   --19   --15   --11   --6   --2
  ------ ------ ------ ------ ----- -----

  ---- ---- ---- ---- ----- -----
  1    2    3    4    5     6
  46   50   59   75   100   136
  ---- ---- ---- ---- ----- -----

No.

  ----- ------ ------ ----- ------ ------
  100   250    300    450   600    750
  12    12.6   13.1   14    14.5   15.2
  ----- ------ ------ ----- ------ ------

  --- --- ---- ---- ----- -----
  1   3   5    7    9     11
  1   9   28   65   125   216
  --- --- ---- ---- ----- -----

No.

For the following data, draw a scatter plot. If we wanted to know when
the population would reach 15,000, would the answer involve
interpolation or extrapolation? Eyeball the line, and estimate the
answer.

  *Year*   *Population*
  -------- --------------
  1990     11,500
  1995     12,100
  2000     12,700
  2005     13,000
  2010     13,750

For the following data, draw a scatter plot. If we wanted to know when
the temperature would reach 28°F, would the answer involve interpolation
or extrapolation? Eyeball the line and estimate the answer.

  ------------------ ---- ---- ---- ---- ----
  *Temperature,°F*   16   18   20   25   30
  *Time, seconds*    46   50   54   55   62
  ------------------ ---- ---- ---- ---- ----

Interpolation. About 60°F.

## Graphical {#fs-id1475649}

For the following exercises, match each scatterplot with one of the four
specified correlations in [\#](#) and [\#](#)*.*

<figure id="Figure_04_03_201">

</figure>

<figure id="Figure_04_03_202a">

</figure>

r=0.95

r=−0.89

This value of r indicates a strong negative correlation or slope, so C

r=−0.26

r=−0.39

This value of r indicates a weak negative correlation, so B

For the following exercises, draw a best-fit line for the plotted data.

## Numeric {#fs-id2464699}

The U.S. Census tracks the percentage of persons 25 years or older who
are college graduates. That data for several years is given in
[\#](#).[^5] Determine whether the trend appears linear. If so, and
assuming the trend continues, in what year will the percentage exceed
35%?

  *Year*   *Percent Graduates*
  -------- ---------------------
  1990     21.3
  1992     21.4
  1994     22.2
  1996     23.6
  1998     24.4
  2000     25.6
  2002     26.7
  2004     27.7
  2006     28
  2008     29.4

The U.S. import of wine (in hectoliters) for several years is given in
[\#](#). Determine whether the trend appears linear. If so, and assuming
the trend continues, in what year will imports exceed 12,000
hectoliters?

  *Year*   *Imports*
  -------- -----------
  1992     2665
  1994     2688
  1996     3565
  1998     4129
  2000     4584
  2002     5655
  2004     6549
  2006     7950
  2008     8487
  2009     9462

Yes, trend appears linear because r=0.985 and will exceed 12,000 near
midyear, 2016, 24.6 years since 1992.

[\#](#) shows the year and the number of people unemployed in a
particular city for several years. Determine whether the trend appears
linear. If so, and assuming the trend continues, in what year will the
number of unemployed reach 5?

  *Year*   *Number Unemployed*
  -------- ---------------------
  1990     750
  1992     670
  1994     650
  1996     605
  1998     550
  2000     510
  2002     460
  2004     420
  2006     380
  2008     320

## Technology {#fs-id1390394}

For the following exercises, use each set of data to calculate the
regression line using a calculator or other technology tool, and
determine the correlation coefficient to 3 decimal places of accuracy.

  ------- ---- ---- ---- ---- -----
  *x*     8    15   26   31   56
  *y*     23   41   53   72   103
  ------- ---- ---- ---- ---- -----

y=1.640x+13.800, r=0.987

  ------- --- ---- ---- ---- ----
  *x*     5   7    10   12   15
  *y*     4   12   17   22   24
  ------- --- ---- ---- ---- ----

  *x*     *y*     *x*     *y*
  ------- ------- ------- -------
  3       21.9    10      18.54
  4       22.22   11      15.76
  5       22.74   12      13.68
  6       22.26   13      14.1
  7       20.78   14      14.02
  8       17.6    15      11.94
  9       16.52   16      12.76

y=−0.962x+26.86,   r=−0.965

  *x*     *y*
  ------- -------
  4       44.8
  5       43.1
  6       38.8
  7       39
  8       38
  9       32.7
  10      30.1
  11      29.3
  12      27
  13      25.8

  ------- ---- ---- ---- ----- ------ ------
  *x*     21   25   30   31    40     50
  *y*     17   11   2    --1   --18   --40
  ------- ---- ---- ---- ----- ------ ------

y=−1.981x+60.197; r=−0.998

  *x*     *y*
  ------- -------
  100     2000
  80      1798
  60      1589
  55      1580
  40      1390
  20      1202

  --- ----- ----- ------ ------ ------ ------
  x   900   988   1000   1010   1200   1205
  y   70    80    82     84     105    108
  --- ----- ----- ------ ------ ------ ------

y=0.121x−38.841,r=0.998

## Extensions {#fs-id2040607}

Graph f(x)=0.5x+10. Pick a set of five ordered pairs using inputs
x=−2,1,5,6,9 and use linear regression to verify that the function is a
good fit for the data.

Graph f(x)=−2x−10. Pick a set of five ordered pairs using inputs
x=−2,1,5,6,9 and use linear regression to verify the function.

(−2,−6),(1,−12),(5,−20),(6,−22),(9,−28); Yes, the function is a good
fit.

For the following exercises, consider this scenario: The profit of a
company decreased steadily over a ten-year span. The following ordered
pairs shows dollars and the number of units sold in hundreds and the
profit in thousands of dollars over the ten-year span, (number of units
sold, profit) for specific recorded years:

(46,1,600),(48,1,550),(50,1,505),(52,1,540),(54,1,495).

Use linear regression to determine a function P where the profit in
thousands of dollars depends on the number of units sold in hundreds.

Find to the nearest tenth and interpret the *x*-intercept.

(189.8,0) If 18,980 units are sold, the company will have a profit of
zero dollars.

Find to the nearest tenth and interpret the *y*-intercept.

## Real-World Applications {#fs-id2429851}

For the following exercises, consider this scenario: The population of a
city increased steadily over a ten-year span. The following ordered
pairs shows the population and the year over the ten-year span,
(population, year) for specific recorded years:

(2500,2000),(2650,2001),(3000,2003),(3500,2006),(4200,2010)

Use linear regression to determine a function y, where the year depends
on the population. Round to three decimal places of accuracy.

y=0.00587x+1985.41

Predict when the population will hit 8,000.

For the following exercises, consider this scenario: The profit of a
company increased steadily over a ten-year span. The following ordered
pairs show the number of units sold in hundreds and the profit in
thousands of dollars over the ten year span, (number of units sold,
profit) for specific recorded years:

(46,250),(48,305),(50,350),(52,390),(54,410).

Use linear regression to determine a function *y*, where the profit in
thousands of dollars depends on the number of units sold in hundreds.

y=20.25x−671.5

Predict when the profit will exceed one million dollars.

For the following exercises, consider this scenario: The profit of a
company decreased steadily over a ten-year span. The following ordered
pairs show dollars and the number of units sold in hundreds and the
profit in thousands of dollars over the ten-year span (number of units
sold, profit) for specific recorded years:

(46,250),(48,225),(50,205),(52,180),(54,165).

Use linear regression to determine a function *y*, where the profit in
thousands of dollars depends on the number of units sold in hundreds.

y=−10.75x+742.50

Predict when the profit will dip below the \$25,000 threshold.

# Chapter Review Exercises {#fs-id3638138}

## [Linear Functions](#) {#fs-id2521178}

Determine whether the algebraic equation is linear. 2x+3y=7

Yes

Determine whether the algebraic equation is linear. 6 x 2 −y=5

Determine whether the function is increasing or decreasing.

f( x )=7x−2

Increasing

Determine whether the function is increasing or decreasing.

g( x )=−x+2

Given each set of information, find a linear equation that satisfies the
given conditions, if possible.

Passes through ( 7,5 ) and ( 3,17 )

y=−3x+26

Given each set of information, find a linear equation that satisfies the
given conditions, if possible.

*x*-intercept at ( 6,0 ) and *y*-intercept at ( 0,10 )

Find the slope of the line shown in the graph.

3

Find the slope of the line graphed.

Write an equation in slope-intercept form for the line shown.

y=2x−2

Does the following table represent a linear function? If so, find the
linear equation that models the data.

  ------ ----- ----- ------ ------
  x      --4   0     2      10
  g(x)   18    --2   --12   --52
  ------ ----- ----- ------ ------

Does the following table represent a linear function? If so, find the
linear equation that models the data.

  ------ ----- ------ ------ ------
  x      6     8      12     26
  g(x)   --8   --12   --18   --46
  ------ ----- ------ ------ ------

Not linear.

On June 1st, a company has \$4,000,000 profit. If the company then loses
150,000 dollars per day thereafter in the month of June, what is the
company's profit *nth* day after June 1st?

For the following exercises, determine whether the lines given by the
equations below are parallel, perpendicular, or neither parallel nor
perpendicular:

2x−6y=12 −x+3y=1

parallel

y= 1 3 x−2 3x+y=−9

For the following exercises, find the *x*- and *y*- intercepts of the
given equation

7x+9y=−63

(--9,0);(0,--7)

f(x)=2x−1

For the following exercises, use the descriptions of the pairs of lines
to find the slopes of Line 1 and Line 2. Is each pair of lines parallel,
perpendicular, or neither?

Line 1: Passes through (5,11) and (10,1)

Line 2: Passes through (−1,3) and (−5,11)

Line 1: m=−2; Line 2: m=−2; Parallel

Line 1: Passes through (8,−10) and (0,−26)

Line 2: Passes through (2,5) and (4,4)

Write an equation for a line perpendicular to f(x)=5x−1 and passing
through the point (5, 20).

y=−0.2x+21

Find the equation of a line with a *y*- intercept of ( 0,2 ) and slope −
1 2 .

Sketch a graph of the linear function f(t)=2t−5.

Find the point of intersection for the 2 linear functions: x=y+6 2x−y=13
.

A car rental company offers two plans for renting a car.

Plan A: 25 dollars per day and 10 cents per mile

Plan B: 50 dollars per day with free unlimited mileage

How many miles would you need to drive for plan B to save you money?

More than 250

## [Modeling with Linear Functions](#) {#fs-id1093904}

Find the area of a triangle bounded by the *y* axis, the line f( x
)=10−2x, and the line perpendicular to f that passes through the origin.

A town's population increases at a constant rate. In 2010 the population
was 55,000. By 2012 the population had increased to 76,000. If this
trend continues, predict the population in 2016.

118,000

The number of people afflicted with the common cold in the winter months
dropped steadily by 50 each year since 2004 until 2010. In 2004, 875
people were inflicted.

Find the linear function that models the number of people afflicted with
the common cold *C* as a function of the year, t. When will no one be
afflicted?

For the following exercises, use the graph in [\#](#) showing the
profit, y, in thousands of dollars, of a company in a given year, x,
where x represents years since 1980.

<figure id="Figure_04_03_202">

</figure>

Find the linear function *y*, where *y* depends on x, the number of
years since 1980.

y=−300x+11,500

Find and interpret the *y*-intercept.

For the following exercise, consider this scenario: In 2004, a school
population was 1,700. By 2012 the population had grown to 2,500.

Assume the population is changing linearly.

ⓐ

How much did the population grow between the year 2004 and 2012?

ⓑ

What is the average population growth per year?

ⓒ

Find an equation for the population,

P

, of the school

t

years after 2004.

ⓐ 800 ⓑ 100 students per year ⓒ P( t )=100t+1700

For the following exercises, consider this scenario: In 2000, the moose
population in a park was measured to be 6,500. By 2010, the population
was measured to be 12,500. Assume the population continues to change
linearly.

Find a formula for the moose population, P .

What does your model predict the moose population to be in 2020?

18,500

For the following exercises, consider this scenario: The median home
values in subdivisions Pima Central and East Valley (adjusted for
inflation) are shown in [\#](#). Assume that the house values are
changing linearly.

  Year   Pima Central   East Valley
  ------ -------------- -------------
  1970   32,000         120,250
  2010   85,000         150,000

In which subdivision have home values increased at a higher rate?

If these trends were to continue, what would be the median home value in
Pima Central in 2015?

\$91,625

## [Fitting Linear Models to Data](#) {#fs-id2267333}

Draw a scatter plot for the data in [\#](#). Then determine whether the
data appears to be linearly related.

  ---- ------
  0    -105
  2    -50
  4    1
  6    55
  8    105
  10   160
  ---- ------

Draw a scatter plot for the data in [\#](#). If we wanted to know when
the population would reach 15,000, would the answer involve
interpolation or extrapolation?

  *Year*   *Population*
  -------- --------------
  1990     5,600
  1995     5,950
  2000     6,300
  2005     6,600
  2010     6,900

Extrapolation

Eight students were asked to estimate their score on a 10-point quiz.
Their estimated and actual scores are given in [\#](#). Plot the points,
then sketch a line that fits the data.

  *Predicted*   *Actual*
  ------------- ----------
  6             6
  7             7
  7             8
  8             8
  7             9
  9             10
  10            10
  10            9

Draw a best-fit line for the plotted data.

For the following exercises, consider the data in [\#](#), which shows
the percent of unemployed in a city of people 25 years or older who are
college graduates is given below, by year.

  --------------------- ------ ------ ------ ------ ------
  *Year*                2000   2002   2005   2007   2010
  *Percent Graduates*   6.5    7.0    7.4    8.2    9.0
  --------------------- ------ ------ ------ ------ ------

Determine whether the trend appears to be linear. If so, and assuming
the trend continues, find a linear regression model to predict the
percent of unemployed in a given year to three decimal places.

In what year will the percentage exceed 12%?

2023

Based on the set of data given in [\#](#), calculate the regression line
using a calculator or other technology tool, and determine the
correlation coefficient to three decimal places.

  --- ---- ---- ---- ----
  x   17   20   23   26
  y   15   25   31   37
  --- ---- ---- ---- ----

Based on the set of data given in [\#](#), calculate the regression line
using a calculator or other technology tool, and determine the
correlation coefficient to three decimal places.

  --- ---- ---- ---- ---- ----
  x   10   12   15   18   20
  y   36   34   30   28   22
  --- ---- ---- ---- ---- ----

y=−1.294x+49.412; r=−0.974

For the following exercises, consider this scenario: The population of a
city increased steadily over a ten-year span. The following ordered
pairs show the population and the year over the ten-year span
(population, year) for specific recorded years:

(3,600,2000);(4,000,2001);(4,700,2003);(6,000,2006)

Use linear regression to determine a function y, where the year depends
on the population, to three decimal places of accuracy.

Predict when the population will hit 12,000.

2027

What is the correlation coefficient for this model to three decimal
places of accuracy?

According to the model, what is the population in 2014?

7,660

# Chapter Practice Test {#fs-id1505702}

Determine whether the following algebraic equation can be written as a
linear function. 2x+3y=7

Yes

Determine whether the following function is increasing or decreasing. f(
x )=−2x+5

Determine whether the following function is increasing or decreasing. f(
x )=7x+9

Increasing

Find a linear equation that passes through (5, 1) and (3, --9), if
possible.

Find a linear equation, that has an *x* intercept at (--4, 0) and a
*y*-intercept at (0, --6), if possible.

y = −1.5x − 6

Find the slope of the line in [\#](#).

<figure id="Image_04_03_220">

</figure>

Write an equation for line in [\#](#).

<figure id="Image_04_03_221">

</figure>

y = −2x − 1

Does [\#](#) represent a linear function? If so, find a linear equation
that models the data.

  -------- ----- ---- ---- ----
  x        --6   0    2    4
  g( x )   14    32   38   44
  -------- ----- ---- ---- ----

Does [\#](#) represent a linear function? If so, find a linear equation
that models the data.

  ------------ --- --- ---- ----
  x            1   3   7    11
  **g*(*x*)*   4   9   19   12
  ------------ --- --- ---- ----

No

At 6 am, an online company has sold 120 items that day. If the company
sells an average of 30 items per hour for the remainder of the day,
write an expression to represent the number of items that were sold n
after 6 am.

For the following exercises, determine whether the lines given by the
equations below are parallel, perpendicular, or neither parallel nor
perpendicular.

y= 3 4 x−9 −4x−3y=8

Perpendicular

−2x+y=3 3x+ 3 2 y=5

Find the *x*- and *y*-intercepts of the equation 2x+7y=−14.

(−7, 0); (0, −2)

Given below are descriptions of two lines. Find the slopes of Line 1 and
Line 2. Is the pair of lines parallel, perpendicular, or neither?

Line 1: Passes through (−2,−6) and (3,14)

Line 2: Passes through (2,6) and (4,14)

Write an equation for a line perpendicular to f(x)=4x+3 and passing
through the point (8,10).

y = −0.25x + 12

Sketch a line with a *y*-intercept of ( 0,5 ) and slope − 5 2 .

Graph of the linear function f(x)=−x+6.

Slope = −1 and y-intercept = 6

For the two linear functions, find the point of intersection: x=y+2
2x−3y=−1 .

A car rental company offers two plans for renting a car.

Plan A: \$25 per day and \$0.10 per mile

Plan B: \$40 per day with free unlimited mileage

How many miles would you need to drive for plan B to save you money?

150

Find the area of a triangle bounded by the *y* axis, the line f( x
)=12−4x, and the line perpendicular to f that passes through the origin.

A town's population increases at a constant rate. In 2010 the population
was 65,000. By 2012 the population had increased to 90,000. Assuming
this trend continues, predict the population in 2018.

165,000

The number of people afflicted with the common cold in the winter months
dropped steadily by 25 each year since 2002 until 2012. In 2002, 8,040
people were inflicted. Find the linear function that models the number
of people afflicted with the common cold C as a function of the year, t.
When will less than 6,000 people be afflicted?

For the following exercises, use the graph in [\#](#), showing the
profit, y, in thousands of dollars, of a company in a given year, x,
where x represents years since 1980.

<figure id="Figure_04_03_224">

</figure>

Find the linear function y, where y depends on x, the number of years
since 1980.

y = 875x + 10,625

Find and interpret the *y*-intercept.

In 2004, a school population was 1250. By 2012 the population had
dropped to 875. Assume the population is changing linearly.

ⓐ

How much did the population drop between the year 2004 and 2012?

ⓑ

What is the average population decline per year?

ⓒ

Find an equation for the population,

P

, of the school

t

years after 2004.

ⓐ

375

ⓑ

dropped an average of 46.875, or about 47 people per year

ⓒ

y = −46.875t + 1250

Draw a scatter plot for the data provided in [\#](#). Then determine
whether the data appears to be linearly related.

  ------- ------- ---- ----- ----- -----
  0       2       4    6     8     10
  --450   --200   10   265   500   755
  ------- ------- ---- ----- ----- -----

Draw a best-fit line for the plotted data.

For the following exercises, use [\#](#), which shows the percent of
unemployed persons 25 years or older who are college graduates in a
particular city, by year.

  --------------------- ------ ------ ------ ------ ------
  *Year*                2000   2002   2005   2007   2010
  *Percent Graduates*   8.5    8.0    7.2    6.7    6.4
  --------------------- ------ ------ ------ ------ ------

Determine whether the trend appears linear. If so, and assuming the
trend continues, find a linear regression model to predict the percent
of unemployed in a given year to three decimal places.

In what year will the percentage drop below 4%?

In early 2018

Based on the set of data given in [\#](#), calculate the regression line
using a calculator or other technology tool, and determine the
correlation coefficient. Round to three decimal places of accuracy.

  -------- ----- ----- ----- ----- -----
  **x**    16    18    20    24    26
  y        106   110   115   120   125
  -------- ----- ----- ----- ----- -----

For the following exercises, consider this scenario: The population of a
city increased steadily over a ten-year span. The following ordered
pairs shows the population (in hundreds) and the year over the ten-year
span, (population, year) for specific recorded years:

(4,500,2000);(4,700,2001);(5,200,2003);(5,800,2006)

Use linear regression to determine a function *y*, where the year
depends on the population. Round to three decimal places of accuracy.

y = 0.00455x + 1979.5

Predict when the population will hit 20,000.

What is the correlation coefficient for this model?

r = 0.999

# 

correlation coefficient

a value,

r

,

between --1 and 1 that indicates the degree of linear correlation of
variables, or how closely a regression line fits a data set.

extrapolation

predicting a value outside the domain and range of the data

interpolation

predicting a value inside the domain and range of the data

least squares regression

a statistical technique for fitting a line to data in a way that
minimizes the differences between the line and data values

model breakdown

when a model no longer applies after a certain point

[^1]: Selected data from
    http://classic.globe.gov/fsl/scientistsblog/2007/10/. Retrieved Aug
    3, 2010

[^2]: Technically, the method minimizes the sum of the squared
    differences in the vertical direction between the line and the data
    values.

[^3]: For example, http://www.shodor.org/unchem/math/lls/leastsq.html

[^4]: http://www.bts.gov/publications/national_transportation_statistics/2005/html/table_04_10.html

[^5]: Based on data from
    http://www.census.gov/hhes/socdemo/education/data/cps/historical/index.html.
    Accessed 5/1/2014.
