m51261

> In this section, you will:
>
> Determine whether a relation represents a function.
>
> Find the value of a function.
>
> Determine whether a function is one-to-one.
>
> Use the vertical line test to identify functions.
>
> Graph the functions listed in the library of functions.

55f2e8ec-a982-4586-9d48-a2f43d7b4107

#  {#eip-483}

## Learning Objectives {#eip-260}

Find the value of a function (IA 3.5.3)

## Objective 1: Find the value of a function (IA 3.5.3) {#eip-891}

A relation is any set of ordered pairs, (x,y). The collection of
x-values in the ordered pairs together make up the domain. The
collection of y-values in the ordered pairs together make up the range.

A special type of relation, called a function, is studied extensively in
mathematics. A function is a relation that assigns to each element in
its domain exactly one element in the range. For each ordered pair in
the relation, each x-value is matched with only one y-value.

:::: {#eip-697 .note}
::: title
Function Notation
:::

For the function y=f(x)

$$\begin{array}{l}
{f\ \text{is the name of the function}} \\
{x\ \text{is the domain value}} \\
{f(x)\ \text{is the range value}\ y\ \text{corresponding to the value}\ x}
\end{array}$$

We read f(x) as *f* of *x* or the value of *f* at *x*.
::::

:::: {#eip-590 .note}
::: title
Representation of Functions, y=f(x)
:::

There are many ways to represent functions including:

Equations

Tables of input and output values

Collections of ordered pairs, or points (x,y) = (independent variable,
dependent variable)

Graphs

Mappings

Verbal descriptions
::::

::: {#eip-957 .example}
Find the value of a function

ⓐ For the function f(x)=2x-5 Find f(4) , f(-6) , f(0) , and f(a) . Find
the value of x that makes f(x)=11 ⓑ Refer to the following table of
values for the function g(x) . x g(x) 0 2 1 5 2 14 3 29 Find g(1) , g(3)
, g(0) . ⓒ For a man of height 5′11 the mapping below shows the
corresponding Body Mass Index (BMI). The body mass index is a
measurement of body fat based on height and weight. A BMI of 18.5--24.9
is considered healthy. Find the BMI for a man of height 5′11 who weighs
180 pounds. Find the weight of a man of height 5′11 and who has a BMI of
22.3 .

ⓐ In part a we are working with an equation and will begin by
substituting the input value for x. Then use the order of operations to
evaluate. f(4)=2(4)−5=8−5=3 $$\begin{matrix}
{f( - 6) = 2( - 6) - 5 = - 12 - 5 = - 17} \\
{f(0) = 2(0) - 5 = 0 - 5 = - 5~} \\
{f(a) = 2(a) - 5 = 2a - 5}
\end{matrix}$$ Find the value of x that makes f(x)=11 Now we are given a
y value and need to solve the equation for the x that yielded an f(x)=11
. $$\begin{matrix}
{f(x) = 2x - 5} \\
{11 = 2x - 5} \\
{11 + 5 = 2x} \\
{16 = 2x} \\
{8 = x}
\end{matrix}$$ ⓑ Refer to the following table of values for the function
g(x) . x g(x) 0 2 1 5 2 14 3 29 To find g(1) , find an x of 1 in your
table and read g(x) at this value, g(1)=5 To find g(3) , find an x of 3
in your table and read g(x) at this value, g(3)=29 To find g(0) , find
an x of 0 in your table and read g(x) at this value, g(0)=2 To find the
value of x that makes g(x)=14 , look through the g(x) column to find an
output of 14 . Notice x=2 in this row, so x=2 . ⓒ The representation
shown in part c is called a mapping. Values in the domain (weight) map
to values in the range (BMI). The BMI for a man of height 5′11 who
weighs 180 pounds is 25.1 . The weight for a man of height 5′11 who has
a BMI of 22.3 is 160 .
:::

### Practice Makes Perfect {#eip-664}

Find the value of a function

ⓐ Find: f(0) . ⓑ Find the values for x when f(x)=0 .

For the function f(x)=3x2-2x+1 find ⓐ f(3) ⓑ f(-2) ⓒ f(t) ⓓ The value(s)
of x that make f(x)=1 .

For the function g(x)=-4+3x+19 , find the following. Make sure to give
exact values. ⓐ g(-5) ⓑ g(2) ⓒ g(0) ⓓ The value(s) of x that make g(x)=0
.

Use the mapping y=G(x) to find the following: ⓐ G(0)= ⓑ G(9)= ⓒ If
G(x)=9 , then x= \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ ⓓ Is G(x) a function? Explain why or
why not.

Use the mapping y=F(x) to find the following: ⓐ F(-1)= ⓑ F(4)= ⓒ F(2)= ⓓ
If F(x)=9 , then x= \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ ⓔ Is F(x) a function? Explain why
or why not.

If h(x)=5x-7 Find: ⓐ h(-3)= ⓑ h(0)= ⓒ h(w+4)= ⓓ h(x)=23 , then x=
\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ ⓔ h(x)=-15 , then x= \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

g(t)=2\|t-5\|+4 Find: ⓐ g(-3)= ⓑ g(0)= ⓒ g(5)= ⓓ g(w)= ⓔ h(x)=20 , then
x= \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

ⓐ Use the following description to build a function called f(x) . \"An
input value is squared, multiplied by -2 and added to 3 ." f(x)= ⓑ
Create a table of input/output values for f(x) below. Show three
numerical input values and one variable input value, and the
corresponding output values in your table. x f(x)

A jetliner changes altitude as its distance from the starting point of a
flight increases. The weight of a growing child increases with time. In
each case, one quantity depends on another. There is a relationship
between the two quantities that we can describe, analyze, and use to
make predictions. In this section, we will analyze such relationships.

# Determining Whether a Relation Represents a Function {#fs-id1165133394710}

A relation is a set of ordered pairs. The set of the first components of
each ordered pair is called the *domain* and the set of the second
components of each ordered pair is called the *range*. Consider the
following set of ordered pairs. The first numbers in each pair are the
first five natural numbers. The second number in each pair is twice that
of the first.

$$\{(1,\mspace{9mu} 2),\mspace{9mu}(2,\mspace{9mu} 4),\mspace{9mu}(3,\mspace{9mu} 6),\mspace{9mu}(4,\mspace{9mu} 8),\mspace{9mu}(5,\mspace{9mu} 10)\}$$

The domain is {1,2,3,4,5}. The range is {2,4,6,8,10}.

Note that each value in the domain is also known as an *input* value, or
independent variable, and is often labeled with the lowercase letter x.
Each value in the range is also known as an *output* value, or dependent
variable, and is often labeled lowercase letter y.

A function f is a relation that assigns a single value in the range to
each value in the domain*.* In other words, no *x*-values are repeated.
For our example that relates the first five natural numbers to numbers
double their values, this relation is a function because each element in
the domain, {1,2,3,4,5}, is paired with exactly one element in the
range, {2,4,6,8,10}.

Now let's consider the set of ordered pairs that relates the terms
"even" and "odd" to the first five natural numbers. It would appear as

$$\{{(\text{odd},\mspace{9mu} 1),\mspace{9mu}(\text{even},\mspace{9mu} 2),\mspace{9mu}(\text{odd},\mspace{9mu} 3),\mspace{9mu}(\text{even},\mspace{9mu} 4),\mspace{9mu}(\text{odd},\mspace{9mu} 5)}\}$$

Notice that each element in the domain, {even,odd} is *not* paired with
exactly one element in the range, {1,2,3,4,5}. For example, the term
"odd" corresponds to three values from the range, {1,3,5} and the term
"even" corresponds to two values from the range, {2,4}. This violates
the definition of a function, so this relation is not a function.

[\#](#) compares relations that are functions and not functions.

<figure id="Figure_01_01_001">

</figure>

:::: {#fs-id1165137533627 .note}
::: title
Function
:::

A function is a relation in which each possible input value leads to
exactly one output value. We say "the output is a function of the
input."

The input values make up the domain, and the output values make up the
range.
::::

:::: {#fs-id1165137445319 .note}
::: title
:::

How To

*Given a relationship between two quantities, determine whether the
relationship is a function.*

Identify the input values.

Identify the output values.

If each input value leads to only one output value, classify the
relationship as a function. If any input value leads to two or more
outputs, do not classify the relationship as a function.
::::

::: {#Example_01_01_01 .example}
The coffee shop menu, shown below, consists of items and their prices. ⓐ
Is price a function of the item? ⓑ Is the item a function of the price?

<figure id="Figure_01_01_004">

</figure>

ⓐ Let's begin by considering the input as the items on the menu. The
output values are then the prices.

<figure id="Figure_01_01_027">

</figure>

Each item on the menu has only one price, so the price is a function of
the item. ⓑ Two items on the menu have the same price. If we consider
the prices to be the input values and the items to be the output, then
the same input value could have more than one output associated with it.
See the image below.

<figure id="eip-idm500770384">

</figure>

Therefore, the item is a not a function of price.
:::

::: {#Example_01_01_02 .example}
In a particular math class, the overall percent grade corresponds to a
grade point average. Is grade point average a function of the percent
grade? Is the percent grade a function of the grade point average?
[\#](#) shows a possible rule for assigning grade points.

  ----------------------- ------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------
  *Percent grade*         0--56   57--61   62--66   67--71   72--77   78--86   87--91   92--100
  *Grade point average*   0.0     1.0      1.5      2.0      2.5      3.0      3.5      4.0
  ----------------------- ------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------

For any percent grade earned, there is an associated grade point
average, so the grade point average is a function of the percent grade.
In other words, if we input the percent grade, the output is a specific
grade point average.

In the grading system given, there is a range of percent grades that
correspond to the same grade point average. For example, students who
receive a grade point average of 3.0 could have a variety of percent
grades ranging from 78 all the way to 86. Thus, percent grade is not a
function of grade point average.
:::

:::: {#fs-id1165137588587 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

[\#](#)[^1] lists the five greatest baseball players of all time in
order of rank.

  Player            Rank
  ---------------- ------
  Babe Ruth          1
  Willie Mays        2
  Ty Cobb            3
  Walter Johnson     4
  Hank Aaron         5

ⓐIs the rank a function of the player name? ⓑIs the player name a
function of the rank?

ⓐ

yes

ⓑ

yes (Note: If two players had been tied for, say, 4th place, then the
name would not have been a function of rank.)
::::

## Using Function Notation {#fs-id1165134474160}

Once we determine that a relationship is a function, we need to display
and define the functional relationships so that we can understand and
use them, and sometimes also so that we can program them into computers.
There are various ways of representing functions. A standard function
notation is one representation that facilitates working with functions.

To represent "height is a function of age," we start by identifying the
descriptive variables h for height and a for age. The letters f,g, and h
are often used to represent functions just as we use x,y, and z to
represent numbers and A,B, and C to represent sets.

$$\begin{array}{lllll}
{h\mspace{9mu}\text{is~}f\mspace{9mu}\text{of~}a} & & & & {\text{We~name~the~function~}f;\mspace{9mu}\text{height~is~a~function~of~age}.} \\
{h = f(a)} & & & & {\text{We~use~parentheses~to~indicate~the~function~input}\text{.~}} \\
{f(a)} & & & & {\text{We~name~the~function~}f;\mspace{9mu}\text{the~expression~is~read~as~“}f\mspace{9mu}\text{of~}a\text{.”}}
\end{array}$$

Remember, we can use any letter to name the function; the notation h( a
) shows us that h depends on a. The value a must be put into the
function h to get a result. The parentheses indicate that age is input
into the function; they do not indicate multiplication.

We can also give an algebraic expression as the input to a function. For
example f( a+b ) means "first add *a* and *b*, and the result is the
input for the function *f*." The operations must be performed in this
order to obtain the correct result.

:::: {#fs-id1165137444349 .note}
::: title
Function Notation
:::

The notation y=f( x ) defines a function named f. This is read as "y is
a function of x." The letter x represents the input value, or
independent variable. The letter y, or f( x ), represents the output
value, or dependent variable.
::::

::: {#Example_01_01_03 .example}
Use function notation to represent a function whose input is the name of
a month and output is the number of days in that month. Assume that the
domain does not include leap years.

The number of days in a month is a function of the name of the month, so
if we name the function f, we write days=f(month) or d=f(m). The name of
the month is the input to a "rule" that associates a specific number
(the output) with each input.

<figure id="Image_01_01_005">

</figure>

For example, f( March )=31, because March has 31 days. The notation d=f(
m ) reminds us that the number of days, d (the output), is dependent on
the name of the month, m (the input).

Note that the inputs to a function do not have to be numbers; function
inputs can be names of people, labels of geometric objects, or any other
element that determines some kind of output. However, most of the
functions we will work with in this book will have numbers as inputs and
outputs.
:::

::: {#Example_01_01_04 .example}
A function N=f( y ) gives the number of police officers, N, in a town in
year y. What does f( 2005 )=300 represent?

When we read f( 2005 )=300, we see that the input year is 2005. The
value for the output, the number of police officers ( N ), is 300.
Remember, N=f( y ). The statement f( 2005 )=300 tells us that in the
year 2005 there were 300 police officers in the town.
:::

:::: {#fs-id1165134257606 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Use function notation to express the weight of a pig in pounds as a
function of its age in days d.

w=f(d)
::::

:::: {#fs-id1165137740780 .note}
::: title
:::

Q&A

*Instead of a notation such as y=f(x), could we use the same symbol for
the output as for the function, such as y=y(x), meaning "*y* is a
function of *x*?"*

*Yes, this is often done, especially in applied subjects that use higher
math, such as physics and engineering. However, in exploring math itself
we like to maintain a distinction between a function such as f, which is
a rule or procedure, and the output y we get by applying f to a
particular input x. This is why we usually use notation such as y=f( x
),P=W( d ), and so on.*
::::

## Representing Functions Using Tables {#fs-id1165137804204}

A common method of representing functions is in the form of a table. The
table rows or columns display the corresponding input and output
values. In some cases, these values represent all we know about the
relationship; other times, the table provides a few select examples from
a more complete relationship.

[\#](#) lists the input number of each month (January = 1, February = 2,
and so on) and the output value of the number of days in that month.
This information represents all we know about the months and days for a
given year (that is not a leap year). Note that, in this table, we
define a days-in-a-month function f where D=f( m ) identifies months by
an integer rather than by name.

  ----------------------------- ---- ---- ---- ---- ---- ---- ---- ---- ---- ---- ---- ----
  *Month number, m (input)*     1    2    3    4    5    6    7    8    9    10   11   12
  *Days in month, D (output)*   31   28   31   30   31   30   31   31   30   31   30   31
  ----------------------------- ---- ---- ---- ---- ---- ---- ---- ---- ---- ---- ---- ----

[\#](#) defines a function Q=g( n ). Remember, this notation tells us
that g is the name of the function that takes the input n and gives the
output Q.

  --- --- --- --- --- ---
  n   1   2   3   4   5
  Q   8   6   7   6   8
  --- --- --- --- --- ---

[\#](#) displays the age of children in years and their corresponding
heights. This table displays just some of the data available for the
heights and ages of children. We can see right away that this table does
not represent a function because the same input value, 5 years, has two
different output values, 40 in. and 42 in.

  -------------------------------- ---- ---- ---- ---- ---- ---- ----
  *Age in years, a (input)*        5    5    6    7    8    9    10
  *Height in inches, h (output)*   40   42   44   47   50   52   54
  -------------------------------- ---- ---- ---- ---- ---- ---- ----

:::: {#fs-id1165137804163 .note}
::: title
:::

How To

*Given a table of input and output values, determine whether the table
represents a function.*

Identify the input and output values.

Check to see if each input value is paired with only one output value.
If so, the table represents a function.
::::

::: {#Example_01_01_05 .example}
Which table, [\#](#), [\#](#), or [\#](#), represents a function (if
any)?

   Input   Output
  ------- --------
     2       1
     5       3
     8       6

   Input   Output
  ------- --------
    --3      5
     0       1
     4       5

   Input   Output
  ------- --------
     1       0
     5       2
     5       4

[\#](#) and [\#](#) define functions. In both, each input value
corresponds to exactly one output value. [\#](#) does not define a
function because the input value of 5 corresponds to two different
output values.

When a table represents a function, corresponding input and output
values can also be specified using function notation.

The function represented by [\#](#) can be represented by writing

$$f(2) = 1,f(5) = 3,\text{and~}f(8) = 6$$

Similarly, the statements

$$g\left( {- 3} \right) = 5,\mspace{9mu} g(0) = 1,\text{and~}g(4) = 5$$

represent the function in [\#](#).

[\#](#) cannot be expressed in a similar way because it does not
represent a function.
:::

:::: {#fs-id1165137749258 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Does [\#](#) represent a function?

   Input   Output
  ------- --------
     1       10
     2      100
     3      1000

yes
::::

# Finding Input and Output Values of a Function {#fs-id1165137503241}

When we know an input value and want to determine the corresponding
output value for a function, we *evaluate* the function. Evaluating will
always produce one result because each input value of a function
corresponds to exactly one output value.

When we know an output value and want to determine the input values that
would produce that output value, we set the output equal to the
function's formula and *solve* for the input. Solving can produce more
than one solution because different input values can produce the same
output value.

## Evaluation of Functions in Algebraic Forms {#fs-id1165137425943}

When we have a function in formula form, it is usually a simple matter
to evaluate the function. For example, the function f( x )=5−3 x 2 can
be evaluated by squaring the input value, multiplying by 3, and then
subtracting the product from 5.

:::: {#fs-id1165135613610 .note}
::: title
:::

How To

*Given the formula for a function, evaluate.*

Substitute the input variable in the formula with the value provided.

Calculate the result.
::::

::: {#Example_01_01_06 .example}
Evaluate f( x )= x 2 +3x−4 at:

ⓐ

2

ⓑ

a

ⓒ

a

\+

h

ⓓ

Now evaluate

f

(

a

\+

h

)

−

f

(

a

)

h

Replace the x in the function with each specified value.

ⓐ

Because the input value is a number, 2, we can use simple algebra to
simplify.

$$\begin{array}{l}
{\mspace{9mu}\mspace{9mu} f(2) = 2^{2} + 3(2) - 4} \\
{\mspace{9mu}\mspace{9mu}\mspace{9mu}\mspace{9mu}\mspace{9mu}\mspace{9mu}\mspace{9mu}\mspace{9mu}\mspace{9mu}\mspace{9mu}\mspace{9mu}\mspace{9mu}\mspace{9mu} = 4 + 6 - 4} \\
{\mspace{9mu}\mspace{9mu}\mspace{9mu}\mspace{9mu}\mspace{9mu}\mspace{9mu}\mspace{9mu}\mspace{9mu}\mspace{9mu}\mspace{9mu}\mspace{9mu}\mspace{9mu}\mspace{9mu} = 6}
\end{array}$$

ⓑ

In this case, the input value is a letter so we cannot simplify the
answer any further.

$$f(a) = a^{2} + 3a - 4$$

ⓒ

With an input value of

a

\+

h

,

we must use the distributive property.

$$\begin{array}{l}
{f(a + h) = {(a + h)}^{2} + 3(a + h) - 4} \\
{\mspace{9mu}\mspace{9mu}\mspace{9mu}\mspace{9mu}\mspace{9mu}\mspace{9mu}\mspace{9mu}\mspace{9mu}\mspace{9mu}\mspace{9mu}\mspace{9mu}\mspace{9mu}\mspace{9mu}\mspace{9mu}\mspace{9mu}\mspace{9mu}\mspace{9mu}\mspace{9mu}\mspace{9mu}\mspace{9mu}\mspace{9mu} = a^{2} + 2ah + h^{2} + 3a + 3h - 4}
\end{array}$$

ⓓ

In this case, we apply the input values to the function more than once,
and then perform algebraic operations on the result. We already found
that

$$f\left( {a + h} \right) = a^{2} + 2ah + h^{2} + 3a + 3h - 4$$

and we know that

$$f(a) = a^{2} + 3a - 4$$

Now we combine the results and simplify.

$$\begin{array}{l}
\begin{array}{l}
 \\
{\frac{f(a + h) - f(a)}{h} = \frac{(a^{2} + 2ah + h^{2} + 3a + 3h - 4) - (a^{2} + 3a - 4)}{h}}
\end{array} \\
\begin{array}{ll}
{\mspace{9mu}\text{~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~} = \frac{2ah + h^{2} + 3h}{h}} & \\
{\mspace{9mu}\text{~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~} = \frac{h(2a + h + 3)}{h}} & {\begin{array}{ll}
\begin{array}{ll}
 & 
\end{array} & 
\end{array}\text{Factor~out~}h.} \\
{\mspace{9mu}\text{~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~} = 2a + h + 3} & {\begin{array}{ll}
\begin{array}{ll}
 & 
\end{array} & 
\end{array}\text{Simplify}.}
\end{array}
\end{array}$$
:::

::: {#Example_01_01_07 .example}
Given the function h( p )= p 2 +2p, evaluate h( 4 ).

To evaluate h( 4 ), we substitute the value 4 for the input variable p
in the given function.

$$\begin{array}{l}
{\mspace{9mu} h(p) = p^{2} + 2p} \\
{\mspace{9mu} h(4) = {(4)}^{2} + 2(4)} \\
{\mspace{9mu}\text{~~~~~~~} = 16 + 8} \\
{\mspace{9mu}\text{~~~~~~~} = 24}
\end{array}$$

Therefore, for an input of 4, we have an output of 24.
:::

:::: {#fs-id1165137704746 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Given the function g( m )= m−4 , evaluate g( 5 ).

g( 5 )=1
::::

::: {#Example_01_01_08 .example}
Given the function h( p )= p 2 +2p, solve for h( p )=3.

$$\begin{array}{llll}
{\mspace{9mu}\text{~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~}h(p) = 3} & & & \\
{\mspace{9mu}\text{~~~~~~~~~~}p^{2} + 2p = 3} & & & {\text{Substitute~the~original~function~}h(p) = p^{2} + 2p.} \\
{p^{2} + 2p - 3 = 0} & & & {\text{Subtract~3~from~each~side}.} \\
{\mspace{9mu}(p + 3\text{)(}p - 1) = 0} & & & {\text{Factor}.}
\end{array}$$

If ( p+3 )( p−1 )=0, either ( p+3 )=0 or ( p−1 )=0 (or both of them
equal 0). We will set each factor equal to 0 and solve for p in each
case.

$$\begin{array}{ll}
{(p + 3) = 0,} & {p = - 3} \\
{(p - 1) = 0,} & {p = 1}
\end{array}$$

This gives us two solutions. The output h( p )=3 when the input is
either p=1 or p=−3. We can also verify by graphing as in [\#](#). The
graph verifies that h( 1 )=h( −3 )=3 and h( 4 )=24.

<figure id="Figure_01_01_006">

</figure>
:::

:::: {#fs-id1165133056923 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Given the function g( m )= m−4 , solve g( m )=2.

m=8
::::

## Evaluating Functions Expressed in Formulas {#fs-id1165137591827}

Some functions are defined by mathematical rules or procedures expressed
in equation form. If it is possible to express the function output with
a formula involving the input quantity, then we can define a function in
algebraic form. For example, the equation 2n+6p=12 expresses a
functional relationship between n and p. We can rewrite it to decide if
p is a function of n.

:::: {#fs-id1165137827882 .note}
::: title
:::

How To

*Given a function in equation form, write its algebraic formula.*

Solve the equation to isolate the output variable on one side of the
equal sign, with the other side as an expression that involves

only

the input variable.

Use all the usual algebraic methods for solving equations, such as
adding or subtracting the same quantity to or from both sides, or
multiplying or dividing both sides of the equation by the same quantity.
::::

::: {#Example_01_01_09 .example}
Express the relationship 2n+6p=12 as a function p=f( n ), if possible.

To express the relationship in this form, we need to be able to write
the relationship where p is a function of n, which means writing it as
p=\[expressioninvolvingn\].

$$\begin{array}{ll}
{2n + 6p = 12} & \\
{\mspace{9mu}\mspace{9mu}\mspace{9mu}\mspace{9mu}\mspace{9mu}\mspace{9mu}\mspace{9mu}\mspace{9mu}\mspace{9mu}\mspace{9mu}\mspace{9mu}\mspace{9mu}\mspace{9mu} 6p = 12 - 2n} & {\begin{array}{lll}
 & & 
\end{array}\text{Subtract~}2n\mspace{9mu}\text{from~both~sides}.} \\
{\mspace{9mu}\mspace{9mu}\mspace{9mu}\mspace{9mu}\mspace{9mu}\mspace{9mu}\mspace{9mu}\mspace{9mu}\mspace{9mu}\mspace{9mu}\mspace{9mu}\mspace{9mu}\mspace{9mu}\mspace{9mu}\mspace{9mu}\mspace{9mu} p = \frac{12 - 2n}{6}} & {\begin{array}{lll}
 & & 
\end{array}\text{Divide~both~sides~by~6~and~simplify}.} \\
{\mspace{9mu}\mspace{9mu}\mspace{9mu}\mspace{9mu}\mspace{9mu}\mspace{9mu}\mspace{9mu}\mspace{9mu}\mspace{9mu}\mspace{9mu}\mspace{9mu}\mspace{9mu}\mspace{9mu}\mspace{9mu}\mspace{9mu}\mspace{9mu} p = \frac{12}{6} - \frac{2n}{6}} & \\
{\mspace{9mu}\mspace{9mu}\mspace{9mu}\mspace{9mu}\mspace{9mu}\mspace{9mu}\mspace{9mu}\mspace{9mu}\mspace{9mu}\mspace{9mu}\mspace{9mu}\mspace{9mu}\mspace{9mu}\mspace{9mu}\mspace{9mu}\mspace{9mu} p = 2 - \frac{1}{3}n} & 
\end{array}$$

Therefore, p as a function of n is written as

$$p = f(n) = 2 - \frac{1}{3}n$$

It is important to note that not every relationship expressed by an
equation can also be expressed as a function with a formula.
:::

::: {#Example_01_01_10 .example}
Does the equation x 2 + y 2 =1 represent a function with x as input and
y as output? If so, express the relationship as a function y=f( x ).

First we subtract x 2 from both sides.

$$y^{2} = 1 - x^{2}$$

We now try to solve for y in this equation.

$$\begin{array}{l}
{y = \pm \sqrt{1 - x^{2}}} \\
{\mspace{9mu}\  = + \sqrt{1 - x^{2}}\mspace{9mu}\text{and~} - \sqrt{1 - x^{2}}}
\end{array}$$

We get two outputs corresponding to the same input, so this relationship
cannot be represented as a single function y=f( x ).
:::

:::: {#fs-id1165137647659 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

If x−8 y 3 =0, express y as a function of x.

y=f( x )= x 3 2
::::

:::: {#fs-id1165135581166 .note}
::: title
:::

Q&A

*Are there relationships expressed by an equation that do represent a
function but which still cannot be represented by an algebraic formula?*

*Yes, this can happen. For example, given the equation x=y+ 2 y , if we
want to express y as a function of x, there is no simple algebraic
formula involving only x that equals y. However, each x does determine a
unique value for y, and there are mathematical procedures by which y can
be found to any desired accuracy. In this case, we say that the equation
gives an implicit (implied) rule for y as a function of x, even though
the formula cannot be written explicitly.*
::::

## Evaluating a Function Given in Tabular Form {#fs-id1165137648450}

As we saw above, we can represent functions in tables. Conversely, we
can use information in tables to write functions, and we can evaluate
functions using the tables. For example, how well do our pets recall the
fond memories we share with them? There is an urban legend that a
goldfish has a memory of 3 seconds, but this is just a myth. Goldfish
can remember up to 3 months, while the beta fish has a memory of up to 5
months. And while a puppy's memory span is no longer than 30 seconds,
the adult dog can remember for 5 minutes. This is meager compared to a
cat, whose memory span lasts for 16 hours.

The function that relates the type of pet to the duration of its memory
span is more easily visualized with the use of a table. See [\#](#).[^2]

      Pet      Memory span in hours
  ----------- ----------------------
     Puppy            0.008
   Adult dog          0.083
      Cat               16
   Goldfish            2160
   Beta fish           3600

At times, evaluating a function in table form may be more useful than
using equations.Here let us call the function P. The domain of the
function is the type of pet and the range is a real number representing
the number of hours the pet's memory span lasts. We can evaluate the
function P at the input value of "goldfish." We would write
P(goldfish)=2160. Notice that, to evaluate the function in table form,
we identify the input value and the corresponding output value from the
pertinent row of the table. The tabular form for function P seems
ideally suited to this function, more so than writing it in paragraph or
function form.

:::: {#fs-id1165137838337 .note}
::: title
:::

How To

*Given a function represented by a table, identify specific output and
input values.*

Find the given input in the row (or column) of input values.

Identify the corresponding output value paired with that input value.

Find the given output values in the row (or column) of output values,
noting every time that output value appears.

Identify the input value(s) corresponding to the given output value.
::::

::: {#Example_01_01_11 .example}
Using [\#](#), ⓐ Evaluate g( 3 ). ⓑ Solve g( n )=6.

  ------------ --- --- --- --- ---
  *n*          1   2   3   4   5
  *g( n )*     8   6   7   6   8
  ------------ --- --- --- --- ---

ⓐ Evaluating g(3) means determining the output value of the function g
for the input value of n=3. The table output value corresponding to n=3
is 7, so g(3)=7. ⓑ Solving g(n)=6 means identifying the input values, n,
that produce an output value of 6. The table below shows two solutions:
2 and 4.

  ------------ --- --- --- --- ---
  *n*          1   2   3   4   5
  *g( n )*     8   6   7   6   8
  ------------ --- --- --- --- ---

When we input 2 into the function g, our output is 6. When we input 4
into the function g, our output is also 6.
:::

:::: {#fs-id1165137584384 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Using the table from *Evaluating and Solving a Tabular Function* above,
evaluate g( 1 ).

g( 1 )=8
::::

## Finding Function Values from a Graph {#fs-id1165135696152}

Evaluating a function using a graph also requires finding the
corresponding output value for a given input value, only in this case,
we find the output value by looking at the graph. Solving a function
equation using a graph requires finding all instances of the given
output value on the graph and observing the corresponding input
value(s).

::: {#Example_01_01_12 .example}
Given the graph in [\#](#),

ⓐ Evaluate f( 2 ). ⓑ Solve f( x )=4.

<figure id="Figure_01_01_007">

</figure>

ⓐ To evaluate f( 2 ), locate the point on the curve where x=2, then read
the *y*-coordinate of that point. The point has coordinates (2,1), so f(
2 )=1. See [\#](#).

<figure id="Figure_01_01_008">

</figure>

ⓑ To solve f( x )=4, we find the output value 4 on the vertical axis.
Moving horizontally along the line y=4, we locate two points of the
curve with output value 4: (−1,4) and (3,4). These points represent the
two solutions to f( x )=4: −1 or 3. This means f( −1 )=4 and f( 3 )=4,
or when the input is −1 or 3, the output is 4. See [\#](#).

<figure id="Figure_01_01_009">

</figure>
:::

:::: {#fs-id1165135149263 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Using [\#](#), solve f( x )=1.

x=0 or x=2
::::

# Determining Whether a Function is One-to-One {#fs-id1165135422920}

Some functions have a given output value that corresponds to two or more
input values. For example, in the stock chart shown in the figure at the
beginning of this chapter, the stock price was \$1000 on five different
dates, meaning that there were five different input values that all
resulted in the same output value of \$1000.

However, some functions have only one input value for each output value,
as well as having only one output for each input. We call these
functions one-to-one functions. As an example, consider a school that
uses only letter grades and decimal equivalents, as listed in [\#](#).

   Letter grade   Grade point average
  -------------- ---------------------
        A                 4.0
        B                 3.0
        C                 2.0
        D                 1.0

This grading system represents a one-to-one function, because each
letter input yields one particular grade point average output and each
grade point average corresponds to one input letter.

To visualize this concept, let's look again at the two simple functions
sketched in [\#](#)*(a)* and [\#](#)*(b)*. The function in part (a)
shows a relationship that is not a one-to-one function because inputs q
and r both give output n. The function in part (b) shows a relationship
that is a one-to-one function because each input is associated with a
single output.

:::: {#fs-id1165135261974 .note}
::: title
One-to-One Function
:::

A one-to-one function is a function in which each output value
corresponds to exactly one input value.
::::

::: {#Example_01_01_13 .example}
Is the area of a circle a function of its radius? If yes, is the
function one-to-one?

A circle of radius r has a unique area measure given by A=π r 2 , so for
any input, r, there is only one output, A. The area is a function of
radius r.

If the function is one-to-one, the output value, the area, must
correspond to a unique input value, the radius. Any area measure A is
given by the formula A=π r 2 . Because areas and radii are positive
numbers, there is exactly one solution: A π . So the area of a circle is
a one-to-one function of the circle's radius.
:::

:::: {#fs-id1165137579363 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

ⓐ

Is a balance a function of the bank account number?

ⓑ

Is a bank account number a function of the balance?

ⓒ

Is a balance a one-to-one function of the bank account number?

ⓐ

yes, because each bank account has a single balance at any given time;

ⓑ

no, because several bank account numbers may have the same balance;

ⓒ

no, because the same output may correspond to more than one input.
::::

:::: {#fs-id1327356 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Evaluate the following: ⓐ If each percent grade earned in a course
translates to one letter grade, is the letter grade a function of the
percent grade? ⓑ If so, is the function one-to-one?

ⓐ

Yes, letter grade is a function of percent grade;

ⓑ

No, it is not one-to-one. There are 100 different percent numbers we
could get but only about five possible letter grades, so there cannot be
only one percent number that corresponds to each letter grade.
::::

# Using the Vertical Line Test {#fs-id1165135435781}

As we have seen in some examples above, we can represent a function
using a graph. Graphs display a great many input-output pairs in a small
space. The visual information they provide often makes relationships
easier to understand. By convention, graphs are typically constructed
with the input values along the horizontal axis and the output values
along the vertical axis.

The most common graphs name the input value x and the output value y,
and we say y is a function of x, or y=f( x ) when the function is named
f. The graph of the function is the set of all points (x,y) in the plane
that satisfies the equation y=f( x ). If the function is defined for
only a few input values, then the graph of the function is only a few
points, where the *x*-coordinate of each point is an input value and the
*y*-coordinate of each point is the corresponding output value. For
example, the black dots on the graph in [\#](#) tell us that f( 0 )=2
and f( 6 )=1. However, the set of all points (x,y) satisfying y=f( x )
is a curve. The curve shown includes (0,2) and (6,1) because the curve
passes through those points.

<figure id="Figure_01_01_011">

</figure>

The vertical line test can be used to determine whether a graph
represents a function. If we can draw any vertical line that intersects
a graph more than once, then the graph does *not* define a function
because a function has only one output value for each input value. See
[\#](#).

<figure id="Figure_01_01_012">

</figure>

:::: {#fs-id1165135460884 .note}
::: title
:::

How To

*Given a graph, use the vertical line test to determine if the graph
represents a function.*

Inspect the graph to see if any vertical line drawn would intersect the
curve more than once.

If there is any such line, determine that the graph does not represent a
function.
::::

::: {#Example_01_01_14 .example}
Which of the graphs in [\#](#) represent(s) a function y=f( x )?

<figure id="Figure_01_01_013">

</figure>

If any vertical line intersects a graph more than once, the relation
represented by the graph is not a function. Notice that any vertical
line would pass through only one point of the two graphs shown in parts
(a) and (b) of [\#](#). From this we can conclude that these two graphs
represent functions. The third graph does not represent a function
because, at most *x*-values, a vertical line would intersect the graph
at more than one point, as shown in [\#](#).

<figure id="Figure_01_01_016">

</figure>
:::

:::: {#fs-id1165134544969 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Does the graph in [\#](#) represent a function?

<figure id="Figure_01_01_017">

</figure>

yes
::::

# Using the Horizontal Line Test {#fs-id1165137610952}

Once we have determined that a graph defines a function, an easy way to
determine if it is a one-to-one function is to use the horizontal line
test. Draw horizontal lines through the graph. If any horizontal line
intersects the graph more than once, then the graph does not represent a
one-to-one function.

:::: {#fs-id1165137736232 .note}
::: title
:::

How To

*Given a graph of a function, use the horizontal line test to determine
if the graph represents a one-to-one function.*

Inspect the graph to see if any horizontal line drawn would intersect
the curve more than once.

If there is any such line, determine that the function is not
one-to-one.
::::

::: {#Example_01_01_15 .example}
Consider the functions shown in [\#](#)*(a)* and [\#](#)*(b)*. Are
either of the functions one-to-one?

The function in [\#](#)*(a)* is not one-to-one. The horizontal line
shown in [\#](#) intersects the graph of the function at two points (and
we can even find horizontal lines that intersect it at three points.)

<figure id="Figure_01_01_010">

</figure>

The function in [\#](#)*(b)* is one-to-one. Any horizontal line will
intersect a diagonal line at most once.
:::

:::: {#fs-id1165135252051 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Is the graph shown in [\#](#)*(c)* one-to-one?

No, because it does not pass the horizontal line test.
::::

# Identifying Basic Toolkit Functions {#fs-id1165135545919}

In this text, we will be exploring functions---the shapes of their
graphs, their unique characteristics, their algebraic formulas, and how
to solve problems with them. When learning to read, we start with the
alphabet. When learning to do arithmetic, we start with numbers. When
working with functions, it is similarly helpful to have a base set of
building-block elements. We call these our "toolkit functions," which
form a set of basic named functions for which we know the graph,
formula, and special properties. Some of these functions are programmed
to individual buttons on many calculators. For these definitions we will
use x as the input variable and y=f( x ) as the output variable.

We will see these toolkit functions, combinations of toolkit functions,
their graphs, and their transformations frequently throughout this book.
It will be very helpful if we can recognize these toolkit functions and
their features quickly by name, formula, graph, and basic table
properties. The graphs and sample table values are included with each
function shown in [\#](#).

+----------------------------------------------------------------+
| Toolkit Functions                                              |
+--------------------+---------------------------------+---------+
| Name               | Function                        | Graph   |
+:==================:+:===============================:+:=======:+
| Constant           | f( x )=c, where c is a constant |         |
+--------------------+---------------------------------+---------+
| Identity           | f( x )=x                        |         |
+--------------------+---------------------------------+---------+
| Absolute value     | f( x )=\| x \|                  |         |
+--------------------+---------------------------------+---------+
| Quadratic          | f( x )= x 2                     |         |
+--------------------+---------------------------------+---------+
| Cubic              | f( x )= x 3                     |         |
+--------------------+---------------------------------+---------+
| Reciprocal         | f( x )= 1 x                     |         |
+--------------------+---------------------------------+---------+
| Reciprocal squared | f( x )= 1 x 2                   |         |
+--------------------+---------------------------------+---------+
| Square root        | f( x )= x                       |         |
+--------------------+---------------------------------+---------+
| Cube root          | f( x )= x 3                     |         |
+--------------------+---------------------------------+---------+

:::: {#fs-id1165134042311 .note}
::: title
:::

Media

Access the following online resources for additional instruction and
practice with functions.

Determine if a Relation is a Function

Vertical Line Test

Introduction to Functions

Vertical Line Test on Graph

One-to-one Functions

Graphs as One-to-one Functions
::::

# Key Equations {#fs-id1165135203679}

  ----------------------------- ---------------------------------
  Constant function             f( x )=c, where c is a constant
  Identity function             f( x )=x
  Absolute value function       f( x )=\| x \|
  Quadratic function            f( x )= x 2
  Cubic function                f( x )= x 3
  Reciprocal function           f( x )= 1 x
  Reciprocal squared function   f( x )= 1 x 2
  Square root function          f( x )= x
  Cube root function            f( x )= x 3
  ----------------------------- ---------------------------------

# Key Concepts {#fs-id1165137692068}

A relation is a set of ordered pairs. A function is a specific type of
relation in which each domain value, or input, leads to exactly one
range value, or output. See

and

.

Function notation is a shorthand method for relating the input to the
output in the form

y

=

f

(

x

)

.

See

and

.

In tabular form, a function can be represented by rows or columns that
relate to input and output values. See

.

To evaluate a function, we determine an output value for a corresponding
input value. Algebraic forms of a function can be evaluated by replacing
the input variable with a given value. See

and

.

To solve for a specific function value, we determine the input values
that yield the specific output value. See

.

An algebraic form of a function can be written from an equation. See

and

.

Input and output values of a function can be identified from a table.
See

.

Relating input values to output values on a graph is another way to
evaluate a function. See

.

A function is one-to-one if each output value corresponds to only one
input value. See

.

A graph represents a function if any vertical line drawn on the graph
intersects the graph at no more than one point. See

.

The graph of a one-to-one function passes the horizontal line test. See

.

# Section Exercises {#fs-id1165137737761}

## Verbal {#fs-id1165137432988}

What is the difference between a relation and a function?

A relation is a set of ordered pairs. A function is a special kind of
relation in which no two ordered pairs have the same first coordinate.

What is the difference between the input and the output of a function?

Why does the vertical line test tell us whether the graph of a relation
represents a function?

When a vertical line intersects the graph of a relation more than once,
that indicates that for that input there is more than one output. At any
particular input value, there can be only one output if the relation is
to be a function.

How can you determine if a relation is a one-to-one function?

Why does the horizontal line test tell us whether the graph of a
function is one-to-one?

When a horizontal line intersects the graph of a function more than
once, that indicates that for that output there is more than one input.
A function is one-to-one if each output corresponds to only one input.

## Algebraic {#fs-id1165134080937}

For the following exercises, determine whether the relation represents a
function.

{ ( a,b ),( c,d ),( a,c ) }

{(a,b),(b,c),(c,c)}

function

For the following exercises, determine whether the relation represents y
as a function of x.

5x+2y=10

y= x 2

function

x= y 2

3 x 2 +y=14

function

2x+ y 2 =6

y=−2 x 2 +40x

function

y= 1 x

x= 3y+5 7y−1

function

x= 1− y 2

y= 3x+5 7x−1

function

x 2 + y 2 =9

2xy=1

function

x= y 3

y= x 3

function

y= 1− x 2

x=± 1−y

function

y=± 1−x

y 2 = x 2

not a function

y 3 = x 2

For the following exercises, evaluate f(−3),f(2),f(−a),−f(a),f(a+h).

f(x)=2x−5

f(−3)=−11; f(2)=−1; f(−a)=−2a−5; −f(a)=−2a+5; f(a+h)=2a+2h−5

f(x)=−5 x 2 +2x−1

f(x)= 2−x +5

f(−3)= 5 +5; f(2)=5; f(−a)= 2+a +5; −f(a)=− 2−a −5;f(a+h)= 2−a−h +5

f(x)= 6x−1 5x+2

f(x)=\| x−1 \|−\| x+1 \|

f(−3)=2; f(2)=1−3=−2; f(−a)=\| −a−1 \|−\| −a+1 \|; −f(a)=−\| a−1 \|+\|
a+1 \|; f(a+h)=\| a+h−1 \|−\| a+h+1 \|

Given the function g(x)=5− x 2 , evaluate g(x+h)−g(x) h ,h≠0.

Given the function g(x)= x 2 +2x, evaluate g(x)−g(a) x−a ,x≠a.

g(x)−g(a) x−a =x+a+2,x≠a

Given the function k(t)=2t−1:

ⓐ

Evaluate

k

(

2

)

.

ⓑ

Solve

k

(

t

)

=

7\.

Given the function f(x)=8−3x:

ⓐ

Evaluate

f

(

−

2

)

.

ⓑ

Solve

f

(

x

)

=

−

1\.

a\. f(−2)=14; b. x=3

Given the function p(c)= c 2 +c:

ⓐ

Evaluate

p

(

−

3

)

.

ⓑ

Solve

p

(

c

)

=

2\.

Given the function f(x)= x 2 −3x:

ⓐ

Evaluate

f

(

5

)

.

ⓑ

Solve

f

(

x

)

=

4\.

a\. f(5)=10; b. x=−1 or x=4

Given the function f(x)= x+2 :

ⓐ

Evaluate

f

(

7

)

.

ⓑ

Solve

f

(

x

)

=

4\.

Consider the relationship 3r+2t=18.

ⓐ

Write the relationship as a function

r

=

f

(

t

)

.

ⓑ

Evaluate

f

(

−

3

)

.

ⓒ

Solve

f

(

t

)

=

2\.

ⓐ

f

(

t

)

=

6

−

2

3

t

;

ⓑ

f

(

−

3

)

=

8

;

ⓒ

t

=

6

## Graphical {#fs-id1165135664071}

For the following exercises, use the vertical line test to determine
which graphs show relations that are functions.

not a function

function

function

function

function

function

Given the following graph, ⓐ Evaluate f(−1). ⓑ Solve for f(x)=3.

Given the following graph, ⓐ Evaluate f(0). ⓑ Solve for f(x)=−3.

ⓐ

f

(

0

)

=

1

;

ⓑ

f

(

x

)

=

−

3

,

x

=

−

2

or

x

=

2

Given the following graph, ⓐ Evaluate f(4). ⓑ Solve for f(x)=1.

For the following exercises, determine if the given graph is a
one-to-one function.

not a function so it is also not a one-to-one function

one-to- one function

function, but not one-to-one

## Numeric {#fs-id1165135342204}

For the following exercises, determine whether the relation represents a
function.

{ ( −1,−1 ),( −2,−2 ),( −3,−3 ) }

{ ( 3,4 ),( 4,5 ),( 5,6 ) }

function

{ (2,5),(7,11),(15,8),(7,9) }

For the following exercises, determine if the relation represented in
table form represents y as a function of x.

  ------- --- ---- ----
  *x*     5   10   15
  *y*     3   8    14
  ------- --- ---- ----

function

  ------- --- ---- ----
  *x*     5   10   15
  *y*     3   8    8
  ------- --- ---- ----

  ------- --- ---- ----
  *x*     5   10   10
  *y*     3   8    14
  ------- --- ---- ----

not a function

For the following exercises, use the function f represented in the table
below.

  ------ ---- ---- --- ---- ---- --- ---- ---- ---- ----
  x      0    1    2   3    4    5   6    7    8    9
  f(x)   74   28   1   53   56   3   36   45   14   47
  ------ ---- ---- --- ---- ---- --- ---- ---- ---- ----

Evaluate f(3).

Solve f(x)=1.

f(x)=1,x=2

For the following exercises, evaluate the function f at the values f( −2
),f(−1),f(0),f(1), and f(2).

f( x )=4−2x

f( x )=8−3x

f(−2)=14; f(−1)=11; f(0)=8; f(1)=5; f(2)=2

f( x )=8 x 2 −7x+3

f( x )=3+ x+3

f(−2)=4;   f(−1)=4.414; f(0)=4.732; f(1)=5; f(2)=5.236

f(x)= x−2 x+3

f( x )= 3 x

f(−2)= 1 9 ; f(−1)= 1 3 ; f(0)=1; f(1)=3; f(2)=9

For the following exercises, evaluate the expressions, given functions
f,g, and h:

f(x)=3x−2 g(x)=5− x 2 h(x)=−2 x 2 +3x−1

3f( 1 )−4g( −2 )

f( 7 3 )−h( −2 )

20

## Technology {#fs-id1165134373511}

For the following exercises, graph y= x 2 on the given domain. Determine
the corresponding range. Show each graph.

\[−0.1,0.1\]

\[−10,10\]

\[0,100\]

\[−100,100\]

For the following exercises, graph y= x 3 on the given domain. Determine
the corresponding range. Show each graph.

\[−0.1,0.1\]

\[−0.001,0.001\]

\[−10,10\]

\[−100,100\]

\[−1,000,000,1,000,000\]

For the following exercises, graph y= x on the given domain. Determine
the corresponding range. Show each graph.

\[0,0.01\]

\[0,100\]

\[0,10\]

\[0,10,000\]

For the following exercises, graph y= x 3 on the given domain. Determine
the corresponding range. Show each graph.

\[−0.001,0.001\]

\[−0.1,0.1\]

\[−1000,1000\]

\[−1,000,000,1,000,000\]

\[−100,100\]

## Real-World Applications {#fs-id1165135580349}

The amount of garbage, G, produced by a city with population p is given
by G=f( p ). G is measured in tons per week, and p is measured in
thousands of people.

ⓐ

The town of Tola has a population of 40,000 and produces 13 tons of
garbage each week. Express this information in terms of the function

f

.

ⓑ

Explain the meaning of the statement

f

(

5

)

=

2\.

The number of cubic yards of dirt, D, needed to cover a garden with area
a square feet is given by D=g( a ).

ⓐ

A garden with area 5000 ft

2

requires 50 yd

3

of dirt. Express this information in terms of the function

g

.

ⓑ

Explain the meaning of the statement

g

(

100

)

=

1\.

ⓐ

g

(

5000

)

=

50

;

ⓑ

The number of cubic yards of dirt required for a garden of 100 square
feet is 1.

Let f( t ) be the number of ducks in a lake t years after 1990. Explain
the meaning of each statement:

ⓐ

f

(

5

)

=

30

ⓑ

f

(

10

)

=

40

Let h( t ) be the height above ground, in feet, of a rocket t seconds
after launching. Explain the meaning of each statement:

ⓐ

h

(

1

)

=

200

ⓑ

h

(

2

)

=

350

ⓐ

The height of a rocket above ground after 1 second is 200 ft.

ⓑ

The height of a rocket above ground after 2 seconds is 350 ft.

Show that the function f( x )=3 ( x−5 ) 2 +7 is *not* one-to-one.

# 

dependent variable

an output variable

domain

the set of all possible input values for a relation

function

a relation in which each input value yields a unique output value

horizontal line test

a method of testing whether a function is one-to-one by determining
whether any horizontal line intersects the graph more than once

independent variable

an input variable

input

each object or value in a domain that relates to another object or value
by a relationship known as a function

one-to-one function

a function for which each value of the output is associated with a
unique input value

output

each object or value in the range that is produced when an input value
is entered into a function

range

the set of output values that result from the input values in a relation

relation

a set of ordered pairs

vertical line test

a method of testing whether a graph represents a function by determining
whether a vertical line intersects the graph no more than once

[^1]: http://www.baseball-almanac.com/legendary/lisn100.shtml. Accessed
    3/24/2014.

[^2]: http://www.kgbanswers.com/how-long-is-a-dogs-memory-span/4221590.
    Accessed 3/24/2014.
