m51262

> In this section, you will:
>
> Find the domain of a function defined by an equation.
>
> Graph piecewise-defined functions.

562c3737-a93d-458c-98c0-a04f442f13bd

#  {#fs-idm234342032}

## Learning Objectives {#fs-idm215391584}

Find the domain and range of a function (IA 3.5.1)

A relation is any set of ordered pairs, (*x*,*y*). A special type of
relation, called a function, is studied extensively in mathematics. A
function is a relation that assigns to each element in its domain
exactly one element in the range. For each ordered pair in the relation,
each *x*-value is matched with only one *y*-value.

When studying functions, it's important to be able to identify potential
input values, called the domain, and potential output values, called the
range.

::: {#eip-646 .example}
Find the domain of the following function: {(2, 10),(3, 10),(4, 20),(5,
30),(6, 40)}.

First identify the input values. The input value is the first coordinate
in an ordered pair. There are no restrictions, as the ordered pairs are
simply listed. The domain is the set of the first coordinates of the
ordered pairs. D: {2,3,4,5,6}

Notice here we are using set notation to represent this collection of
input values.
:::

A graph of a function can always help in identifying domain and range.
When graphing basic functions, we can scan the *x*-axis just as we read
in English from left to right to help determine the domain. We will scan
the *y*-axis from bottom to top to help determine the range. So, in
finding both domain and range, we scan axes from smallest to largest to
see which values are defined. Typically, we will use interval notation,
where you show the endpoints of defined sets using parentheses (endpoint
not included) or brackets (endpoint is included) to express both the
domain, D, and range, R, of a relation or function.

::: {#eip-326 .example}
Find the domain and range of the function f whose graph is shown below.

Scanning the x-axis from left to right helps us to see the graph is
defined for x-values between --3 to 1, so the domain of f   is
(−3,1\]. (Note that open points translate to use of parentheses in
interval notation, while included points translate to use of brackets in
interval notation.)

Scanning the y-values from the bottom to top of the graph helps us to
see the graph is defined for y-values between 0 to --4, so the range is
\[−4,0\].
:::

When working with functions expressed as an equation, the following
steps can help to identify the domain.

:::: {#fs-id1165137455840 .note}
::: title
:::

Identify the input values.

Identify any restrictions on the input and exclude those values from the
domain.

Write the domain in interval notation form, if possible.
::::

::: {#eip-413 .example}
Find the domain of the function f(x)=x2-3

The input value, shown by the variable *x* in the equation, is squared
and then the result is lowered by three. Any real number may be squared
and then be lowered by three, so there are no restrictions on the domain
of this function. The domain is the set of real numbers.

In interval notation form, the domain of *f* is (−∞,∞).
:::

## Activity: Restrictions on the domain of functions {#eip-851}

Without a calculator, complete the following:

60= \_\_\_\_\_; 00= \_\_\_\_\_; 06= \_\_\_\_\_; 4= \_\_\_\_\_; --4=
\_\_\_\_\_; 83= \_\_\_\_\_; --83= \_\_\_\_\_

Clearly describe the two "trouble spots" which prevent expressions from
representing real numbers:

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

Keeping these trouble spots in mind, algebraically determine the domain
of each function. Write each answer in interval notation below the
function. Remember, looking at the graph of the function can always help
in finding domain and range.

  --------------------- --------------------- --------------------- ---------------------
  f(x)=x-5x+3           g(x)=5x+7             h(x)=-35x-17          f(x)=x2-9x2+7x+10
  D:\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_;   D:\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_;   D:\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_;   D:\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_;
  --------------------- --------------------- --------------------- ---------------------

### Practice Makes Perfect {#eip-idm368111600}

Find the domain and range of a function.

For the relation {(1,3),(2,6),(3,9),(4,12),(5,15)}:

ⓐ Find the domain of the function, express using set notation. ⓑ Find
the range of the function, express using set notation.

Use the graph of the function to find its domain and range. Write the
domain and range in interval notation.

D: \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ R: \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

Graph the following function below. Use this graph to help determine the
domain and range and express using interval notation. f(x)=-4x-3

D: \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ R: \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

Use the graph of the function to find its domain and range. Write the
domain and range in interval notation.

D: \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ R: \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

Graph the following function. Use this graph to help determine the
domain and range and express using interval notation. f(x)=-2\|x\|+3

D: \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ R: \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

Graph the following function. Use this graph to help determine the
domain and range and express using interval notation. f(x)=x-3

D: \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ R: \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

Graph the following function. Use this graph to help determine the
domain and range and express using interval notation. f(x)=x+43

D: \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ R: \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

Graph the following function. Use this graph to help determine the
domain and range and express using interval notation. f(x)=(x-3)(2x+1)

D: \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ R: \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

Horror and thriller movies are both popular and, very often, extremely
profitable. When big-budget actors, shooting locations, and special
effects are included, however, studios count on even more viewership to
be successful. Consider five major thriller/horror entries from the
early 2000s---*I am Legend*, *Hannibal*, *The Ring*, *The Grudge*, and
*The Conjuring*. [\#](#) shows the amount, in dollars, each of those
movies grossed when they were released as well as the ticket sales for
horror movies in general by year. Notice that we can use the data to
create a function of the amount each movie earned or the total ticket
sales for all horror movies by year. In creating various functions using
the data, we can identify different independent and dependent variables,
and we can analyze the data and the functions to determine the domain
and range. In this section, we will investigate methods for determining
the domain and range of functions such as these.

<figure id="Figure_01_02_001">

</figure>

# Finding the Domain of a Function Defined by an Equation {#fs-id1165135193832}

In [Functions and Function Notation](#), we were introduced to the
concepts of domain and range. In this section, we will practice
determining domains and ranges for specific functions. Keep in mind
that, in determining domains and ranges, we need to consider what is
physically possible or meaningful in real-world examples, such as
tickets sales and year in the horror movie example above. We also need
to consider what is mathematically permitted. For example, we cannot
include any input value that leads us to take an even root of a negative
number if the domain and range consist of real numbers. Or in a function
expressed as a formula, we cannot include any input value in the domain
that would lead us to divide by 0.

We can visualize the domain as a "holding area" that contains "raw
materials" for a "function machine" and the range as another "holding
area" for the machine's products. See [\#](#).

<figure id="Figure_01_02_002">

</figure>

We can write the domain and range in interval notation, which uses
values within brackets to describe a set of numbers. In interval
notation, we use a square bracket \[ when the set includes the endpoint
and a parenthesis ( to indicate that the endpoint is either not included
or the interval is unbounded. For example, if a person has \$100 to
spend, they would need to express the interval that is more than 0 and
less than or equal to 100 and write ( 0,100 \]. We will discuss interval
notation in greater detail later.

Let's turn our attention to finding the domain of a function whose
equation is provided. Oftentimes, finding the domain of such functions
involves remembering three different forms. First, if the function has
no denominator or an odd root, consider whether the domain could be all
real numbers. Second, if there is a denominator in the function's
equation, exclude values in the domain that force the denominator to be
zero. Third, if there is an even root, consider excluding values that
would make the radicand negative.

Before we begin, let us review the conventions of interval notation:

The smallest number from the interval is written first.

The largest number in the interval is written second, following a comma.

Parentheses, ( or ), are used to signify that an endpoint value is not
included, called exclusive.

Brackets, \[ or \], are used to indicate that an endpoint value is
included, called inclusive.

See [\#](#) for a summary of interval notation.

<figure id="Figure_01_02_029">

</figure>

::: {#Example_01_02_01 .example}
Find the domain of the following function: { ( 2,10 ),( 3,10 ),( 4,20
),( 5,30 ),( 6,40 ) } .

First identify the input values. The input value is the first coordinate
in an ordered pair. There are no restrictions, as the ordered pairs are
simply listed. The domain is the set of the first coordinates of the
ordered pairs.

$$\left\{ 2,3,4,5,6 \right\}$$
:::

:::: {#fs-id1165137569901 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Find the domain of the function:

{ (−5,4),(0,0),(5,−4),(10,−8),(15,−12) }

{−5,0,5,10,15}
::::

:::: {#fs-id1165134225655 .note}
::: title
:::

How To

*Given a function written in equation form, find the domain.*

Identify the input values.

Identify any restrictions on the input and exclude those values from the
domain.

Write the domain in interval form, if possible.
::::

::: {#Example_01_02_02 .example}
Find the domain of the function f(x)= x 2 −1.

The input value, shown by the variable x in the equation, is squared and
then the result is lowered by one. Any real number may be squared and
then be lowered by one, so there are no restrictions on the domain of
this function. The domain is the set of real numbers.

In interval form, the domain of f is ( −∞,∞ ).
:::

:::: {#fs-id1165135639906 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Find the domain of the function: f(x)=5−x+ x 3 .

( −∞,∞ )
::::

:::: {#fs-id1165137417188 .note}
::: title
:::

How To

*Given a function written in an equation form that includes a fraction,
find the domain.*

Identify the input values.

Identify any restrictions on the input. If there is a denominator in the
function's formula, set the denominator equal to zero and solve for

x

. If the function's formula contains an even root, set the radicand
greater than or equal to 0, and then solve.

Write the domain in interval form, making sure to exclude any restricted
values from the domain.
::::

::: {#Example_01_02_03 .example}
Find the domain of the function f(x)= x+1 2−x .

When there is a denominator, we want to include only values of the input
that do not force the denominator to be zero. So, we will set the
denominator equal to 0 and solve for x.

$$\begin{array}{rcl}
{2 - x} & = & 0 \\
{- x} & = & -2 \\
x & = & 2
\end{array}$$

Now, we will exclude 2 from the domain. The answers are all real numbers
where x\<2 or x\>2 as shown in [\#](#). We can use a symbol known as the
union, ∪, to combine the two sets. In interval notation, we write the
solution: ( −∞,2 )∪( 2,∞ ).

<figure id="Image_01_02_028">

</figure>
:::

:::: {#fs-id1165133349280 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Find the domain of the function: f(x)= 1+4x 2x−1 .

( −∞, 1 2 )∪( 1 2 ,∞ )
::::

:::: {#fs-id1165135527005 .note}
::: title
:::

How To

*Given a function written in equation form including an even root, find
the domain.*

Identify the input values.

Since there is an even root, exclude any real numbers that result in a
negative number in the radicand. Set the radicand greater than or equal
to zero and solve for

x

.

The solution(s) are the domain of the function. If possible, write the
answer in interval form.
::::

::: {#Example_01_02_04 .example}
Find the domain of the function f(x)= 7−x .

When there is an even root in the formula, we exclude any real numbers
that result in a negative number in the radicand.

Set the radicand greater than or equal to zero and solve for x.

$$\begin{array}{rcl}
{7 - x} & \geq & 0 \\
{- x} & \geq & -7 \\
x & \leq & 7
\end{array}$$

Now, we will exclude any number greater than 7 from the domain. The
answers are all real numbers less than or equal to 7, or (−∞,7\].
:::

:::: {#fs-id1165137737842 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Find the domain of the function f(x)= 5+2x .

\[ − 5 2 ,∞ )
::::

:::: {#fs-id1165134328219 .note}
::: title
:::

Q&A

*Can there be functions in which the domain and range do not intersect
at all?*

*Yes. For example, the function f(x)=− 1 x has the set of all positive
real numbers as its domain but the set of all negative real numbers as
its range. As a more extreme example, a function's inputs and outputs
can be completely different categories (for example, names of weekdays
as inputs and numbers as outputs, as on an attendance chart), in such
cases the domain and range have no elements in common.*
::::

# Using Notations to Specify Domain and Range {#fs-id1165137677916}

In the previous examples, we used inequalities and lists to describe the
domain of functions. We can also use inequalities, or other statements
that might define sets of values or data, to describe the behavior of
the variable in set-builder notation. For example, { x\|10≤x\<30 }
describes the behavior of x in set-builder notation. The braces {} are
read as "the set of," and the vertical bar \| is read as "such that," so
we would read { x\|10≤x\<30 } as "the set of *x*-values such that 10 is
less than or equal to x, and x is less than 30."

[\#](#) compares inequality notation, set-builder notation, and interval
notation.

<figure id="Figure_01_02_003">

</figure>

To combine two intervals using inequality notation or set-builder
notation, we use the word "or." As we saw in earlier examples, we use
the union symbol, ∪, to combine two unconnected intervals. For example,
the union of the sets {2,3,5} and {4,6} is the set {2,3,4,5,6}. It is
the set of all elements that belong to one *or* the other (or both) of
the original two sets. For sets with a finite number of elements like
these, the elements do not have to be listed in ascending order of
numerical value. If the original two sets have some elements in common,
those elements should be listed only once in the union set. For sets of
real numbers on intervals, another example of a union is

$$\left\{ {\left. x \right|\mspace{9mu}\ |x| \geq 3} \right\} = \left( {- \infty, - 3} \right\rbrack \cup \left\lbrack {3,\infty} \right)$$

:::: {#fs-id1165137641795 .note}
::: title
Set-Builder Notation and Interval Notation
:::

*Set-builder notation* is a method of specifying a set of elements that
satisfy a certain condition. It takes the form {x\|statement about x}
which is read as, "the set of all x such that the statement about x is
true." For example,

$$\left\{ x \middle| 4 < x \leq 12 \right\}$$

*Interval notation* is a way of describing sets that include all real
numbers between a lower limit that may or may not be included and an
upper limit that may or may not be included. The endpoint values are
listed between brackets or parentheses. A square bracket indicates
inclusion in the set, and a parenthesis indicates exclusion from the
set. For example,

$$\left( {4,12} \right\rbrack$$
::::

:::: {#fs-id1165137805770 .note}
::: title
:::

How To

*Given a line graph, describe the set of values using interval
notation.*

Identify the intervals to be included in the set by determining where
the heavy line overlays the real line.

At the left end of each interval, use \[ with each end value to be
included in the set (solid dot) or ( for each excluded end value (open
dot).

At the right end of each interval, use \] with each end value to be
included in the set (filled dot) or ) for each excluded end value (open
dot).

Use the union symbol

∪

to combine all intervals into one set.
::::

::: {#Example_01_02_05 .example}
Describe the intervals of values shown in [\#](#) using inequality
notation, set-builder notation, and interval notation.

<figure id="Figure_01_02_004">

</figure>

To describe the values, x, included in the intervals shown, we would
say, " x is a real number greater than or equal to 1 and less than or
equal to 3, or a real number greater than 5."

  ------------------------ --------------------
  *Inequality*             1≤x≤3orx\>5
  *Set-builder notation*   { x\|1≤x≤3orx\>5 }
  *Interval notation*      \[1,3\]∪(5,∞)
  ------------------------ --------------------

Remember that, when writing or reading interval notation, using a square
bracket means the boundary is included in the set. Using a parenthesis
means the boundary is not included in the set.
:::

:::: {#fs-id1165137779165 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Given [\#](#), specify the graphed set in

ⓐ

words

ⓑ

set-builder notation

ⓒ

interval notation

<figure id="Figure_01_02_005">

</figure>

ⓐ values that are less than or equal to --2, or values that are greater
than or equal to --1 and less than 3 ⓑ { x\|x≤−2or−1≤x\<3 } ⓒ
(−∞,−2\]∪\[−1,3)
::::

# Finding Domain and Range from Graphs {#fs-id1165137653855}

Another way to identify the domain and range of functions is by using
graphs. Because the domain refers to the set of possible input values,
the domain of a graph consists of all the input values shown on the
*x*-axis. The range is the set of possible output values, which are
shown on the *y*-axis. Keep in mind that if the graph continues beyond
the portion of the graph we can see, the domain and range may be greater
than the visible values. See [\#](#).

<figure id="Figure_01_02_006">

</figure>

We can observe that the graph extends horizontally from −5 to the right
without bound, so the domain is \[ −5,∞ ). The vertical extent of the
graph is all range values 5 and below, so the range is ( −∞,5 \]. Note
that the domain and range are always written from smaller to larger
values, or from left to right for domain, and from the bottom of the
graph to the top of the graph for range.

::: {#Example_01_02_06 .example}
Find the domain and range of the function f whose graph is shown in
[\#](#).

<figure id="Figure_01_02_007">

</figure>

We can observe that the horizontal extent of the graph is --3 to 1, so
the domain of f is ( −3,1 \].

The vertical extent of the graph is 0 to --4, so the range is \[ −4 , 0
\]. See [\#](#).

<figure id="Figure_01_02_008">

</figure>
:::

::: {#Example_01_02_07 .example}
Find the domain and range of the function f whose graph is shown in
[\#](#).

<figure id="Figure_01_02_009">

</figure>

The input quantity along the horizontal axis is "years," which we
represent with the variable t for time. The output quantity is
"thousands of barrels of oil per day," which we represent with the
variable b for barrels. The graph may continue to the left and right
beyond what is viewed, but based on the portion of the graph that is
visible, we can determine the domain as 1973≤t≤2008 and the range as
approximately 180≤b≤2010.

In interval notation, the domain is \[1973, 2008\], and the range is
about \[180, 2010\]. For the domain and the range, we approximate the
smallest and largest values since they do not fall exactly on the grid
lines.
:::

:::: {#fs-id1165135545972 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Given [\#](#), identify the domain and range using interval notation.

<figure id="Figure_01_02_010">

</figure>

domain =\[1950,2002\] range = \[47,000,000,89,000,000\]
::::

:::: {#fs-id1165137434590 .note}
::: title
:::

Q&A

*Can a function's domain and range be the same?*

*Yes. For example, the domain and range of the cube root function are
both the set of all real numbers.*
::::

# Finding Domains and Ranges of the Toolkit Functions {#fs-id1165134384565}

We will now return to our set of toolkit functions to determine the
domain and range of each.

<figure id="Figure_01_02_011">

</figure>

<figure id="Figure_01_02_012">

</figure>

<figure id="Figure_01_02_013">

</figure>

<figure id="Figure_01_02_014">

</figure>

<figure id="Figure_01_02_015">

</figure>

<figure id="Figure_01_02_016">

</figure>

<figure id="Figure_01_02_017">

</figure>

<figure id="Figure_01_02_018">

</figure>

<figure id="Figure_01_02_019">

</figure>

:::: {#fs-id1165137462732 .note}
::: title
:::

How To

*Given the formula for a function, determine the domain and range.*

Exclude from the domain any input values that result in division by
zero.

Exclude from the domain any input values that have nonreal (or
undefined) number outputs.

Use the valid input values to determine the range of the output values.

Look at the function graph and table values to confirm the actual
function behavior.
::::

::: {#Example_01_02_08 .example}
Find the domain and range of f(x)=2 x 3 −x.

There are no restrictions on the domain, as any real number may be cubed
and then subtracted from the result.

The domain is ( −∞,∞ ) and the range is also ( −∞,∞ ).
:::

::: {#Example_01_02_09 .example}
Find the domain and range of f(x)= 2 x+1 .

We cannot evaluate the function at −1 because division by zero is
undefined. The domain is ( −∞,−1 )∪( −1,∞ ). Because the function is
never zero, we exclude 0 from the range. The range is ( −∞,0 )∪( 0,∞ ).
:::

::: {#Example_01_02_10 .example}
Find the domain and range of f(x)=2 x+4 .

We cannot take the square root of a negative number, so the value inside
the radical must be nonnegative.

$$x + 4 \geq 0\mspace{9mu}\text{when~}x \geq - 4$$

The domain of f( x ) is \[−4,∞).

We then find the range. We know that f( −4 )=0, and the function value
increases as x increases without any upper limit. We conclude that the
range of f is \[ 0, ∞ ) .

[\#](#) represents the function f.

<figure id="Figure_01_02_020">

</figure>
:::

:::: {#fs-id1165137430800 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Find the domain and range of f( x )=− 2−x .

domain: ( −∞,2 \]; range: ( −∞,0 \]
::::

# Graphing Piecewise-Defined Functions {#fs-id1165135440477}

Sometimes, we come across a function that requires more than one formula
in order to obtain the given output. For example, in the toolkit
functions, we introduced the absolute value function f(x)=\| x \|. With
a domain of all real numbers and a range of values greater than or equal
to 0, absolute value can be defined as the magnitude, or modulus, of a
real number value regardless of sign. It is the distance from 0 on the
number line. All of these definitions require the output to be greater
than or equal to 0.

If we input 0, or a positive value, the output is the same as the input.

$$f(x) = x\mspace{9mu}\text{if}\mspace{9mu} x \geq 0$$

If we input a negative value, the output is the opposite of the input.

$$f(x) = - x\mspace{9mu}\text{if}\mspace{9mu} x < 0$$

Because this requires two different processes or pieces, the absolute
value function is an example of a piecewise function. A piecewise
function is a function in which more than one formula is used to define
the output over different pieces of the domain.

We use piecewise functions to describe situations in which a rule or
relationship changes as the input value crosses certain "boundaries."
For example, we often encounter situations in business for which the
cost per piece of a certain item is discounted once the number ordered
exceeds a certain value. Tax brackets are another real-world example of
piecewise functions. For example, consider a simple tax system in which
incomes up to \$10,000 are taxed at 10%, and any additional income is
taxed at 20%. The tax on a total income S would be 0.1S if S≤\$10,000
and \$1000+0.2(S−\$10,000) if S\>\$10,000.

:::: {#fs-id1165137531241 .note}
::: title
Piecewise Function
:::

A *piecewise function* is a function in which more than one formula is
used to define the output. Each formula has its own domain, and the
domain of the function is the union of all these smaller domains. We
notate this idea like this:

$$f(x) = \left\{ \begin{array}{l}
{\text{formula~1~~~~~if~}x\mspace{9mu}\text{is~in~domain~1}} \\
{\text{formula~2~~~~~if~}x\mspace{9mu}\text{is~in~domain~2}} \\
{\text{formula~3~~~~~if~}x\mspace{9mu}\text{is~in~domain~3}}
\end{array} \right.$$

In piecewise notation, the absolute value function is

$$|x| = \left\{ \begin{array}{l}
{x\mspace{9mu}\text{~~~if~~}x \geq 0} \\
{- x\mspace{9mu}\text{~if~~}x < 0}
\end{array} \right.$$
::::

:::: {#fs-id1165137768426 .note}
::: title
:::

How To

*Given a piecewise function, write the formula and identify the domain
for each interval.*

Identify the intervals for which different rules apply.

Determine formulas that describe how to calculate an output from an
input in each interval.

Use braces and if-statements to write the function.
::::

::: {#Example_01_02_11 .example}
A museum charges \$5 per person for a guided tour with a group of 1 to 9
people or a fixed \$50 fee for a group of 10 or more people. Write a
function relating the number of people, n, to the cost, C. Since one
cannot have fractions of a person, this is really a discrete function.
However, for this exercise we will treat it as a continuous function.

Two different formulas will be needed. For *n*-values under 10, C=5n.
For values of n that are 10 or greater, C=50.

$$C(n) = \left\{ \begin{matrix}
{5n} & \text{if} & {0 < n < 10} \\
50 & \text{if} & {n \geq 10}
\end{matrix} \right.$$

The function is represented in [\#](#). The graph is a diagonal line
from n=0 to n=10 and a constant after that. In this example, the two
formulas agree at the meeting point where n=10, but not all piecewise
functions have this property.

<figure id="Figure_01_02_021">

</figure>
:::

::: {#Example_01_02_12 .example}
A cell phone company uses the function below to determine the cost, C,
in dollars for g gigabytes of data transfer.

$$C(g) = \left\{ \begin{matrix}
25 & \text{if} & {0 < g < 2} \\
{25 + 10(g - 2)} & \text{if} & {g \geq 2}
\end{matrix} \right.$$

Find the cost of using 1.5 gigabytes of data and the cost of using 4
gigabytes of data.

To find the cost of using 1.5 gigabytes of data, C(1.5), we first look
to see which part of the domain our input falls in. Because 1.5 is less
than 2, we use the first formula.

$$C(1.5) = \text{\$}25$$

To find the cost of using 4 gigabytes of data, C(4), we see that our
input of 4 is greater than 2, so we use the second formula.

$$C(4) = 25 + 10(4 - 2) = \text{\$}45$$

The function is represented in [\#](#). We can see where the function
changes from a constant to a shifted and stretched identity at g=2. We
plot the graphs for the different formulas on a common set of axes,
making sure each formula is applied on its proper domain.

<figure id="Figure_01_02_022">

</figure>
:::

:::: {#fs-id1165137600493 .note}
::: title
:::

How To

*Given a piecewise function, sketch a graph.*

Indicate on the

x

-axis the boundaries defined by the intervals on each piece of the
domain.

For each piece of the domain, graph on that interval using the
corresponding equation pertaining to that piece. Do not graph two
functions over one interval because it would violate the criteria of a
function.
::::

::: {#Example_01_02_13 .example}
Sketch a graph of the function.

$$f(x) = \left\{ \begin{matrix}
x^{2} & \text{if} & {x \leq 1} \\
3 & \text{if} & {1 < x \leq 2} \\
x & \text{if} & {x > 2}
\end{matrix} \right.$$

Each of the component functions is from our library of toolkit
functions, so we know their shapes. We can imagine graphing each
function and then limiting the graph to the indicated domain. At the
endpoints of the domain, we draw open circles to indicate where the
endpoint is not included because of a less-than or greater-than
inequality; we draw a closed circle where the endpoint is included
because of a less-than-or-equal-to or greater-than-or-equal-to
inequality.

[\#](#) shows the three components of the piecewise function graphed on
separate coordinate systems.

<figure id="Figure_01_02_023">

</figure>

Now that we have sketched each piece individually, we combine them in
the same coordinate plane. See [\#](#).

<figure id="Figure_01_02_026">

</figure>

Note that the graph does pass the vertical line test even at x=1 and x=2
because the points (1,3) and (2,2 ) are not part of the graph of the
function, though (1,1) and (2,3) are.
:::

:::: {#fs-id1165137762558 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Graph the following piecewise function.

$$f(x) = \left\{ \begin{matrix}
x^{3} & \text{if} & {x < - 1} \\
{- 2} & \text{if} & {- 1 < x < 4} \\
\sqrt{x} & \text{if} & {x > 4}
\end{matrix} \right.$$
::::

:::: {#fs-id1165137810682 .note}
::: title
:::

Q&A

*Can more than one formula from a piecewise function be applied to a
value in the domain?*

*No. Each value corresponds to one equation in a piecewise formula.*
::::

:::: {#fs-id1165135190393 .note}
::: title
:::

Media

Access these online resources for additional instruction and practice
with domain and range.

Domain and Range of Square Root Functions

Determining Domain and Range

Find Domain and Range Given the Graph

Find Domain and Range Given a Table

Find Domain and Range Given Points on a Coordinate Plane
::::

# Key Concepts {#fs-id1165134077347}

The domain of a function includes all real input values that would not
cause us to attempt an undefined mathematical operation, such as
dividing by zero or taking the square root of a negative number.

The domain of a function can be determined by listing the input values
of a set of ordered pairs. See

.

The domain of a function can also be determined by identifying the input
values of a function written as an equation. See

,

, and

.

Interval values represented on a number line can be described using
inequality notation, set-builder notation, and interval notation. See

.

For many functions, the domain and range can be determined from a graph.
See

and

.

An understanding of toolkit functions can be used to find the domain and
range of related functions. See

,

, and

.

A piecewise function is described by more than one formula. See

and

.

A piecewise function can be graphed using each algebraic formula on its
assigned subdomain. See

.

# Section Exercises {#fs-id1165135176628}

## Verbal {#fs-id1165135172218}

Why does the domain differ for different functions?

The domain of a function depends upon what values of the independent
variable make the function undefined or imaginary.

How do we determine the domain of a function defined by an equation?

Explain why the domain of f(x)= x 3 is different from the domain of
f(x)= x .

There is no restriction on x for f(x)= x 3 because you can take the cube
root of any real number. So the domain is all real numbers, (−∞,∞). When
dealing with the set of real numbers, you cannot take the square root of
negative numbers. So x -values are restricted for f(x)= x to nonnegative
numbers and the domain is \[0,∞).

When describing sets of numbers using interval notation, when do you use
a parenthesis and when do you use a bracket?

How do you graph a piecewise function?

Graph each formula of the piecewise function over its corresponding
domain. Use the same scale for the x -axis and y -axis for each graph.
Indicate inclusive endpoints with a solid circle and exclusive endpoints
with an open circle. Use an arrow to indicate −∞ or ∞. Combine the
graphs to find the graph of the piecewise function.

## Algebraic {#fs-id1165137771069}

For the following exercises, find the domain of each function using
interval notation.

f(x)=−2x(x−1)(x−2)

f(x)=5−2 x 2

(−∞,∞)

f( x )=3 x−2

f( x )=3− 6−2x

(−∞,3\]

f(x)= 4−3x

f(x)= x 2 +4

(−∞,∞)

f(x)= 1−2x 3

f(x)= x−1 3

(−∞,∞)

f(x)= 9 x−6

f( x )= 3x+1 4x+2

(−∞,− 1 2 )∪(− 1 2 ,∞)

f( x )= x+4 x−4

f(x)= x−3 x 2 +9x−22

(−∞,−11)∪(−11,2)∪(2,∞)

f(x)= 1 x 2 −x−6

f(x)= 2 x 3 −250 x 2 −2x−15

(−∞,−3)∪(−3,5)∪(5,∞)

f(x)= 5 x−3

f(x)= 2x+1 5−x

(−∞,5)

f(x)= x−4 x−6

f(x)= x−6 x−4

\[6,∞)

f(x)= x x

f(x)= x 2 −9x x 2 −81

( −∞,−9 )∪( −9,9 )∪( 9,∞ )

Find the domain of the function f(x)= 2 x 3 −50x by:

ⓐ

using algebra.

ⓑ

graphing the function in the radicand and determining intervals on the

x

-axis for which the radicand is nonnegative.

## Graphical {#fs-id1165137580833}

For the following exercises, write the domain and range of each function
using interval notation.

domain: (2,8\], range \[6,8)

domain: \[−4,4\], range: \[0,2\]

domain: \[−5,3), range: \[ 0,2 \]

domain: (−∞,1\], range: \[0,∞)

domain: \[ −6,− 1 6 \]∪\[ 1 6 ,6 \]; range: \[ −6,− 1 6 \]∪\[ 1 6 ,6 \]

domain: \[−3,∞); range: \[0,∞)

For the following exercises, sketch a graph of the piecewise function.
Write the domain in interval notation.

f(x)={ x+1 if x\<−2 −2x−3 if x≥−2

f(x)={ 2x−1 if x\<1 1+x if x≥1

domain: (−∞,∞)

f(x)={ x+1ifx\<0 x−1ifx\>0

f( x )={ 3 if x\<0 x if x≥0

domain: (−∞,∞)

f(x)={ x 2      if x\<0 1−x if x\>0

f(x)={ x 2 x+2 ifx\<0 ifx≥0

domain: (−∞,∞)

f( x )={ x+1 if x\<1 x 3 if x≥1

f(x)={ \|x\| 1 ifx\<2 ifx≥2

domain: (−∞,∞)

## Numeric {#fs-id1165134118450}

For the following exercises, given each function f, evaluate
f(−3),f(−2),f(−1), and f(0).

f(x)={ x+1 if x\<−2 −2x−3 if x≥−2

f(x)={ 1 if x≤−3 0 if x\>−3

f(−3)=1; f(−2)=0; f(−1)=0; f(0)=0

f(x)={ −2 x 2 +3 if x≤−1 5x−7 if x\>−1

For the following exercises, given each function f, evaluate
f(−1),f(0),f(2), and f(4).

f(x)={ 7x+3 if x\<0 7x+6 if x≥0

f(−1)=−4; f(0)=6; f(2)=20; f(4)=34

f( x )={ x 2 −2 if x\<2 4+\| x−5 \| if x≥2

f( x )={ 5x if x\<0 3 if 0≤x≤3 x 2 if x\>3

f(−1)=−5; f(0)=3; f(2)=3; f(4)=16

For the following exercises, write the domain for the piecewise function
in interval notation.

f(x)={ x+1ifx\<−2 −2x−3ifx≥−2

f(x)={ x 2 −2ifx\<1 − x 2 +2ifx\>1

domain: (−∞,1)∪(1,∞)

f(x)={ 2x−3 −3 x 2 ifx\<0 ifx≥2

## Technology {#fs-id1165135194497}

Graph y= 1 x 2 on the viewing window \[−0.5,−0.1\] and \[0.1,0.5\].
Determine the corresponding range for the viewing window. Show the
graphs.

window: \[−0.5,−0.1\]; range: \[4,100\]

window: \[0.1,0.5\]; range: \[4,100\]

Graph y= 1 x on the viewing window \[−0.5,−0.1\] and \[0.1,0.5\].
Determine the corresponding range for the viewing window. Show the
graphs.

## Extension {#fs-id1165137733672}

Suppose the range of a function f is \[−5,8\]. What is the range of
\|f(x)\|?

\[0,8\]

Create a function in which the range is all nonnegative real numbers.

Create a function in which the domain is x\>2.

Many answers. One function is f(x)= 1 x−2 .

## Real-World Applications {#fs-id1165137832031}

The height h of a projectile is a function of the time t it is in the
air. The height in feet for t seconds is given by the function h(t)=−16
t 2 +96t. What is the domain of the function? What does the domain mean
in the context of the problem?

The cost in dollars of making x items is given by the function
C(x)=10x+500.

ⓐ

The fixed cost is determined when zero items are produced. Find the
fixed cost for this item.

ⓑ

What is the cost of making 25 items?

ⓒ

Suppose the maximum cost allowed is \$1500. What are the domain and
range of the cost function,

C

(

x

)

?

ⓐ

The fixed cost is \$500.

ⓑ

The cost of making 25 items is \$750.

ⓒ

The domain is \[0, 100\] and the range is \[500, 1500\].

# 

interval notation

a method of describing a set that includes all numbers between a lower
limit and an upper limit; the lower and upper values are listed between
brackets or parentheses, a square bracket indicating inclusion in the
set, and a parenthesis indicating exclusion

piecewise function

a function in which more than one formula is used to define the output

set-builder notation

a method of describing a set by a rule that all of its members obey; it
takes the form

{

x

\|

statement about 

x

}
