m51263

> In this section, you will:
>
> Find the average rate of change of a function.
>
> Use a graph to determine where a function is increasing, decreasing,
> or constant.
>
> Use a graph to locate local maxima and local minima.
>
> Use a graph to locate the absolute maximum and absolute minimum.

f37919d7-b496-4e36-8196-431ae4733a64

#  {#fs-idm364153936}

## Learning Objectives {#fs-idm347966032}

Find the slope of a line (IA 3.2.1)

## Objective 1: Find the slope of a line (IA 3.2.1) {#eip-5}

In our work with functions we will make observations about when the
function increases or decreases and how quickly this change takes place.
The average rate of change is a measure of change of a function and
tells us how an output quantity, or y value, changes relative to an
input quantity, or x value. Finding the average rate of change between
two points is equivalent to finding the slope of the line segment
connecting these two data points.

average rate of change=change in outputchange in
input=ΔyΔx=y2-y1x2-x1=f(x2)-f(x1)x2-x1=riserun

When interpreting an average rate of change it will be important to
consider the units of measurement. Make sure to always attach these
units to both the numerator and denominator when they are provided to
you.

:::: {#eip-idm320577248 .note}
::: title
Quick Guide to the Slopes of Lines
:::
::::

::: {#fs-id1167835309939 .example}
Find the slope of the line shown.

Locate two points on the graph whose coordinates are integers.

( 0 , 5 ) = ( x 1 , y 1 ) ( 3 , 3 ) = ( x 2 , y 2 )

It may help to visualize this change as m = rise run . Count the rise
between the points: down 2 units. Then count the run, or horizontal
change: to the right 3 units. Note, since the line goes down, the slope
is negative. Use the slope formula: m = rise run = ( y 2 - y 1 )( x 2 -
x 1 ) = 3-53-0 -23
:::

### Activity: Finding slopes of lines. {#eip-851}

ⓐ Which pair of lines appear parallel? \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ and
\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_. Find their slopes: \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_;
\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ ⓑ Which pair of lines appear perpendicular?
\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ and \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_. Find their slopes:
\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_; \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ ⓒ Complete the following: Two lines
are parallel if their slopes are \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_. Two lines are
perpendicular if their slopes are \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_.

### Practice Makes Perfect {#eip-329}

Find the slope of a line and the average rate of change.

Complete this table's y-values, and then graph the line. y=23x+1

+:-----------+:--+
|   x    y   |   |
|   ---- --- |   |
|   -6       |   |
|   -3       |   |
|   0        |   |
|   3        |   |
|   6        |   |
+------------+---+

What is the slope of this line? \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ What is the y-intercept
of this line? ( \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ , \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ )

The following table shows the number of Associates degrees awarded (in
thousands) in the US for several years.

  Year   Number of Associate's Degrees Earned (in thousands)
  ------ -----------------------------------------------------
  2000   569
  2001   579
  2005   668
  2010   719
  2014   1,003

  : Source: U.S. National Center for Education Statistics. {#eip-545
  .unnumbered}

Find the following average rates of change, being careful to attach
units to your answers.

ⓐ Between 2005 and 2000. Average rate of change= f(x2)-f(x1)x2-x1

ⓑ Between 2001 and 2010. Average rate of change= f(x2)-f(x1)x2-x1

ⓒ Between 2014 and 2010. Average rate of change= f(x2)-f(x1)x2-x1

ⓐ Complete the following table of values for f(x)=x2+2x-8

  x     f(x)
  ----- ------
  --2   
  2     
  4     

ⓑ Use the table above to find the average rate of change between *x*=--2
and *x*=2.

ⓒ Use the table above to find the average rate of change between *x*=2
and *x*=4

ⓓ Sketch the graph of *f*(*x*) below and graph the lines with slopes
equal to the average rates of change found in parts ⓑ and ⓒ.

ⓐ Complete the following table of values for g(x)=1x+3 x g(x) --1 0 2 ⓑ
Use the table above to find the average rate of change between *x*=--1
and *x*=0. ⓒ Use the table above to find the average rate of change
between *x*=--1 and *x*=2. ⓓ Sketch the graph of *g*(*x*) below and
graph the lines with slopes equal to the average rates of change found
in parts ⓑ and ⓒ.

Gasoline costs have experienced some wild fluctuations over the last
several decades. [\#](#)[^1] lists the average cost, in dollars, of a
gallon of gasoline for the years 2005--2012. The cost of gasoline can be
considered as a function of year.

  ------- ------- ------- ------- ------- ------- ------- ------- -------
  *y*     2005    2006    2007    2008    2009    2010    2011    2012

  *C( y   2.31    2.62    2.84    3.30    2.41    2.84    3.58    3.68
  )*                                                              
  ------- ------- ------- ------- ------- ------- ------- ------- -------

If we were interested only in how the gasoline prices changed between
2005 and 2012, we could compute that the cost per gallon had increased
from \$2.31 to \$3.68, an increase of \$1.37. While this is interesting,
it might be more useful to look at how much the price changed *per
year*. In this section, we will investigate changes such as these.

# Finding the Average Rate of Change of a Function {#fs-id1165137645483}

The price change per year is a rate of change because it describes how
an output quantity changes relative to the change in the input quantity.
We can see that the price of gasoline in [\#](#) did not change by the
same amount each year, so the rate of change was not constant. If we use
only the beginning and ending data, we would be finding the average rate
of change over the specified period of time. To find the average rate of
change, we divide the change in the output value by the change in the
input value.

$$\begin{array}{ccl}
\text{Average~rate~of~change} & = & \frac{\text{Change~in~output}}{\text{Change~in~input}} \\
 & = & \frac{\Delta y}{\Delta x} \\
 & = & \frac{y_{2} - y_{1}}{x_{2} - x_{1}} \\
 & = & \frac{f\left( x_{2} \right) - f\left( x_{1} \right)}{x_{2} - x_{1}}
\end{array}$$

The Greek letter Δ (delta) signifies the change in a quantity; we read
the ratio as "delta-*y* over delta-*x*" or "the change in y divided by
the change in x. " Occasionally we write Δf instead of Δy, which still
represents the change in the function's output value resulting from a
change to its input value. It does not mean we are changing the function
into some other function.

In our example, the gasoline price increased by \$1.37 from 2005 to
2012. Over 7 years, the average rate of change was

$$\frac{\text{Δ}y}{\text{Δ}x} = \frac{\text{\$}1.37}{\text{7~years}} \approx 0.196\mspace{9mu}\text{dollars~per~year}$$

On average, the price of gas increased by about 19.6¢ each year.

Other examples of rates of change include:

A population of rats increasing by 40 rats per week

A car traveling 68 miles per hour (distance traveled changes by 68 miles
each hour as time passes)

A car driving 27 miles per gallon (distance traveled changes by 27 miles
for each gallon)

The current through an electrical circuit increasing by 0.125 amperes
for every volt of increased voltage

The amount of money in a college account decreasing by \$4,000 per
quarter

:::: {#fs-id1165137642836 .note}
::: title
Rate of Change
:::

A rate of change describes how an output quantity changes relative to
the change in the input quantity. The units on a rate of change are
"output units per input units."

The average rate of change between two input values is the total change
of the function values (output values) divided by the change in the
input values.

$$\frac{\Delta y}{\Delta x} = \frac{f\left( x_{2} \right) - f\left( x_{1} \right)}{x_{2} - x_{1}}$$
::::

:::: {#fs-id1165135530407 .note}
::: title
:::

How To

*Given the value of a function at different points, calculate the
average rate of change of a function for the interval between two values
x 1 and x 2 .*

Calculate the difference

y

2

−

y

1

=

Δ

y

.

Calculate the difference

x

2

−

x

1

=

Δ

x

.

Find the ratio

Δ

y

Δ

x

.
::::

::: {#Example_01_03_01 .example}
Using the data in [\#](#), find the average rate of change of the price
of gasoline between 2007 and 2009.

In 2007, the price of gasoline was \$2.84. In 2009, the cost was \$2.41.
The average rate of change is

$$\begin{array}{ccl}
\frac{\Delta y}{\Delta x} & = & \frac{y_{2} - y_{1}}{x_{2} - x_{1}} \\
 & = & \frac{\$ 2.41 - \$ 2.84}{2009 - 2007} \\
 & = & \frac{- \$ 0.43}{2\mspace{9mu}\text{years}} \\
 & = & {- \$ 0.22\mspace{9mu}\text{per~year}}
\end{array}$$

Note that a decrease is expressed by a negative change or "negative
increase." A rate of change is negative when the output decreases as the
input increases or when the output increases as the input decreases.
:::

:::: {#fs-id1165133267246 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Using the data in [\#](#), find the average rate of change between 2005
and 2010.

\$2.84−\$2.31 5years = \$0.53 5years =\$0.106 per year.
::::

::: {#Example_01_03_02 .example}
Given the function g( t ) shown in [\#](#), find the average rate of
change on the interval \[ −1,2 \].

<figure id="Figure_01_03_001">

</figure>

At t=−1, [\#](#) shows g( −1 )=4. At t=2, the graph shows g( 2 )=1.

<figure id="Figure_01_03_002">

</figure>

The horizontal change Δt=3 is shown by the red arrow, and the vertical
change Δg(t)=−3 is shown by the turquoise arrow. The average rate of
change is shown by the slope of the orange line segment. The output
changes by --3 while the input changes by 3, giving an average rate of
change of

$$\frac{1 - 4}{2 - \left( {- 1} \right)} = \frac{- 3}{3} = -1$$

Note that the order we choose is very important. If, for example, we use
y 2 − y 1 x 1 − x 2 , we will not get the correct answer. Decide which
point will be 1 and which point will be 2, and keep the coordinates
fixed as ( x 1 , y 1 ) and ( x 2 , y 2 ).
:::

::: {#Example_01_03_03 .example}
After picking up a friend who lives 10 miles away and leaving on a trip,
Anna records her distance from home over time. The values are shown in
[\#](#). Find her average speed over the first 6 hours.

  -------------------- ---- ---- ---- ----- ----- ----- ----- -----
  **t* (hours)*        0    1    2    3     4     5     6     7
  **D*(*t*) (miles)*   10   55   90   153   214   240   292   300
  -------------------- ---- ---- ---- ----- ----- ----- ----- -----

Here, the average speed is the average rate of change. She traveled 282
miles in 6 hours.

$$\begin{array}{ccl}
\frac{292 - 10}{6 - 0} & = & \frac{282}{6} \\
 & = & 47
\end{array}$$

The average speed is 47 miles per hour.

Because the speed is not constant, the average speed depends on the
interval chosen. For the interval \[2,3\], the average speed is 63 miles
per hour.
:::

::: {#Example_01_03_04 .example}
Compute the average rate of change of f( x )= x 2 − 1 x on the interval
\[2,4\].

We can start by computing the function values at each endpoint of the
interval.

$$\begin{array}{cclccl}
{f(2)} & = & {2^{2} - \frac{1}{2}} & {\qquad{f(4)}} & = & {4^{2} - \frac{1}{4}} \\
 & = & {4 - \frac{1}{2}} & & = & {16 - \frac{1}{4}} \\
 & = & \frac{7}{2} & & = & \frac{63}{4}
\end{array}$$

Now we compute the average rate of change.

$$\begin{array}{ccl}
\text{Average~rate~of~change} & = & \frac{f(4) - f(2)}{4 - 2} \\
 & = & \frac{\frac{63}{4} - \frac{7}{2}}{4 - 2} \\
 & = & \frac{\frac{49}{4}}{2} \\
 & = & \frac{49}{8}
\end{array}$$
:::

:::: {#fs-id1165137436764 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Find the average rate of change of f( x )=x−2 x on the interval \[1,9\].

1 2
::::

::: {#Example_01_03_05 .example}
The electrostatic force F, measured in newtons, between two charged
particles can be related to the distance between the particles d, in
centimeters, by the formula F( d )= 2 d 2 . Find the average rate of
change of force if the distance between the particles is increased from
2 cm to 6 cm.

We are computing the average rate of change of F( d )= 2 d 2 on the
interval \[2,6\].

$$\begin{array}{cclc}
\text{Average~rate~of~change} & = & {\mspace{9mu}\frac{F(6) - F(2)}{6 - 2}} & \\
 & = & \frac{\frac{2}{6^{2}} - \frac{2}{2^{2}}}{6 - 2} & {\text{Simplify}.} \\
 & = & \frac{\frac{2}{36} - \frac{2}{4}}{4} & \\
 & = & \frac{- \frac{16}{36}}{4} & {\text{Combine~numerator~terms}.} \\
 & = & {- \frac{1}{9}} & \text{Simplify}
\end{array}$$

The average rate of change is − 1 9 newton per centimeter.
:::

::: {#Example_01_03_06 .example}
Find the average rate of change of g( t )= t 2 +3t+1 on the interval
\[0,a\]. The answer will be an expression involving a in simplest form.

We use the average rate of change formula.

$$\begin{array}{cclc}
\text{Average~rate~of~change} & = & \frac{g(a) - g(0)}{a - 0} & {\text{Evaluate}.} \\
 & = & \frac{\left( a^{2} + 3a + 1 \right) - \left( 0^{2} + 3(0) + 1 \right)}{a - 0} & {\text{Simplify}.} \\
 & = & \frac{a^{2} + 3a + 1 - 1}{a} & {\text{Simplify~and~factor}.} \\
 & = & \frac{a(a + 3)}{a} & {\text{Divide~by~the~common~factor~}a.} \\
 & = & {a + 3} & 
\end{array}$$

This result tells us the average rate of change in terms of a between
t=0 and any other point t=a. For example, on the interval \[0,5\], the
average rate of change would be 5+3=8.
:::

:::: {#fs-id1165137453128 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Find the average rate of change of f(x)= x 2 +2x−8 on the interval
\[5,a\] in simplest forms in terms of a.

a+7
::::

# Using a Graph to Determine Where a Function is Increasing, Decreasing, or Constant {#fs-id1165135440486}

As part of exploring how functions change, we can identify intervals
over which the function is changing in specific ways. We say that a
function is increasing on an interval if the function values increase as
the input values increase within that interval. Similarly, a function is
decreasing on an interval if the function values decrease as the input
values increase over that interval. The average rate of change of an
increasing function is positive, and the average rate of change of a
decreasing function is negative. [\#](#) shows examples of increasing
and decreasing intervals on a function.

<figure id="Figure_01_03_004">

</figure>

While some functions are increasing (or decreasing) over their entire
domain, many others are not. A value of the input where a function
changes from increasing to decreasing (as we go from left to right, that
is, as the input variable increases) is the location of a local maximum.
The function value at that point is the local maximum. If a function has
more than one, we say it has local maxima. Similarly, a value of the
input where a function changes from decreasing to increasing as the
input variable increases is the location of a local minimum. The
function value at that point is the local minimum. The plural form is
"local minima." Together, local maxima and minima are called local
extrema, or local extreme values, of the function. (The singular form is
"extremum.") Often, the term *local* is replaced by the term *relative*.
In this text, we will use the term *local*.

Clearly, a function is neither increasing nor decreasing on an interval
where it is constant. A function is also neither increasing nor
decreasing at extrema. Note that we have to speak of *local* extrema,
because any given local extremum as defined here is not necessarily the
highest maximum or lowest minimum in the function's entire domain.

For the function whose graph is shown in [\#](#), the local maximum is
16, and it occurs at x=−2. The local minimum is −16 and it occurs at
x=2.

<figure id="Figure_01_03_015">

</figure>

To locate the local maxima and minima from a graph, we need to observe
the graph to determine where the graph attains its highest and lowest
points, respectively, within an open interval. Like the summit of a
roller coaster, the graph of a function is higher at a local maximum
than at nearby points on both sides. The graph will also be lower at a
local minimum than at neighboring points. [\#](#) illustrates these
ideas for a local maximum.

<figure id="Figure_01_03_005">

</figure>

These observations lead us to a formal definition of local extrema.

:::: {#fs-id1165134169419 .note}
::: title
Local Minima and Local Maxima
:::

A function f is an increasing function on an open interval if f( b )\>f(
a ) for any two input values a and b in the given interval where b\>a.

A function f is a decreasing function on an open interval if f( b )\<f(
a ) for any two input values a and b in the given interval where b\>a.

A function f has a local maximum at x=b if there exists an interval
(a,c) with a\<b\<c such that, for any x in the interval ( a,c ), f( x
)≤f( b ). Likewise, f has a local minimum at x=b if there exists an
interval (a,c) with a\<b\<c such that, for any x in the interval ( a,c
), f( x )≥f( b ).
::::

::: {#Example_01_03_07 .example}
Given the function p( t ) in [\#](#), identify the intervals on which
the function appears to be increasing.

<figure id="Figure_01_03_006">

</figure>

We see that the function is not constant on any interval. The function
is increasing where it slants upward as we move to the right and
decreasing where it slants downward as we move to the right. The
function appears to be increasing from t=1 to t=3 and from t=4 on.

In interval notation, we would say the function appears to be increasing
on the interval (1,3) and the interval (4,∞).

Notice in this example that we used open intervals (intervals that do
not include the endpoints), because the function is neither increasing
nor decreasing at t=1 , t=3 , and t=4 . These points are the local
extrema (two minima and a maximum).
:::

::: {#Example_01_03_08 .example}
Graph the function f( x )= 2 x + x 3 . Then use the graph to estimate
the local extrema of the function and to determine the intervals on
which the function is increasing.

Using technology, we find that the graph of the function looks like that
in [\#](#). It appears there is a low point, or local minimum, between
x=2 and x=3, and a mirror-image high point, or local maximum, somewhere
between x=−3 and x=−2.

<figure id="Figure_01_03_007">

</figure>

Most graphing calculators and graphing utilities can estimate the
location of maxima and minima. [\#](#) provides screen images from two
different technologies, showing the estimate for the local maximum and
minimum.

<figure id="Figure_01_03_008">

</figure>

Based on these estimates, the function is increasing on the interval
(−∞,−2.449) and (2.449,∞). Notice that, while we expect the extrema to
be symmetric, the two different technologies agree only up to four
decimals due to the differing approximation algorithms used by each.
(The exact location of the extrema is at ± 6 , but determining this
requires calculus.)
:::

:::: {#fs-id1165135160233 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Graph the function f( x )= x 3 −6 x 2 −15x+20 to estimate the local
extrema of the function. Use these to determine the intervals on which
the function is increasing and decreasing.

The local maximum appears to occur at (−1,28), and the local minimum
occurs at (5,−80). The function is increasing on (−∞,−1)∪(5,∞) and
decreasing on (−1,5).
::::

::: {#Example_01_03_09 .example}
For the function f whose graph is shown in [\#](#), find all local
maxima and minima.

<figure id="Figure_01_03_011">

</figure>

Observe the graph of f. The graph attains a local maximum at x=1 because
it is the highest point in an open interval around x=1. The local
maximum is the y -coordinate at x=1, which is 2.

The graph attains a local minimum at x=−1 because it is the lowest point
in an open interval around x=−1. The local minimum is the *y*-coordinate
at x=−1, which is −2.
:::

# Analyzing the Toolkit Functions for Increasing or Decreasing Intervals {#fs-id1165134544960}

We will now return to our toolkit functions and discuss their graphical
behavior in [\#](#), [\#](#), and [\#](#).

<figure id="Figure_01_03_012">

</figure>

<figure id="Figure_01_03_016">

</figure>

<figure id="Figure_01_03_017">

</figure>

# Use A Graph to Locate the Absolute Maximum and Absolute Minimum {#fs-id1165134381626}

There is a difference between locating the highest and lowest points on
a graph in a region around an open interval (locally) and locating the
highest and lowest points on the graph for the entire domain. The y-
coordinates (output) at the highest and lowest points are called the
*absolute maximum* and *absolute minimum*, respectively.

To locate absolute maxima and minima from a graph, we need to observe
the graph to determine where the graph attains it highest and lowest
points on the domain of the function. See [\#](#).

<figure id="Figure_01_03_014">

</figure>

Not every function has an absolute maximum or minimum value. The toolkit
function f( x )= x 3 is one such function.

:::: {#fs-id1165135251290 .note}
::: title
Absolute Maxima and Minima
:::

The absolute maximum of f at x=c is f( c ) where f( c )≥f( x ) for all x
in the domain of f.

The absolute minimum of f at x=d is f( d ) where f( d )≤f( x ) for all x
in the domain of f.
::::

::: {#Example_01_03_10 .example}
For the function f shown in [\#](#), find all absolute maxima and
minima.

<figure id="Figure_01_03_013">

</figure>

Observe the graph of f. The graph attains an absolute maximum in two
locations, x=−2 and x=2, because at these locations, the graph attains
its highest point on the domain of the function. The absolute maximum is
the *y*-coordinate at x=−2 and x=2, which is 16.

The graph attains an absolute minimum at x=3, because it is the lowest
point on the domain of the function's graph. The absolute minimum is the
*y*-coordinate at x=3, which is −10.
:::

:::: {#fs-id1165135708033 .note}
::: title
:::

Media

Access this online resource for additional instruction and practice with
rates of change.

Average Rate of Change
::::

# Key Equations {#fs-id1165135541564}

  ------------------------ -------------------------------------
  Average rate of change   Δy Δx = f( x 2 )−f( x 1 ) x 2 − x 1
  ------------------------ -------------------------------------

# Key Concepts {#fs-id1165135481945}

A rate of change relates a change in an output quantity to a change in
an input quantity. The average rate of change is determined using only
the beginning and ending data. See

.

Identifying points that mark the interval on a graph can be used to find
the average rate of change. See

.

Comparing pairs of input and output values in a table can also be used
to find the average rate of change. See

.

An average rate of change can also be computed by determining the
function values at the endpoints of an interval described by a formula.
See

and

.

The average rate of change can sometimes be determined as an expression.
See

.

A function is increasing where its rate of change is positive and
decreasing where its rate of change is negative. See

.

A local maximum is where a function changes from increasing to
decreasing and has an output value larger (more positive or less
negative) than output values at neighboring input values.

A local minimum is where the function changes from decreasing to
increasing (as the input increases) and has an output value smaller
(more negative or less positive) than output values at neighboring input
values.

Minima and maxima are also called extrema.

We can find local extrema from a graph. See

and

.

The highest and lowest points on a graph indicate the maxima and minima.
See

.

# Section Exercises {#fs-id1165135457748}

## Verbal {#fs-id1165135457752}

Can the average rate of change of a function be constant?

Yes, the average rate of change of all linear functions is constant.

If a function f is increasing on (a,b) and decreasing on (b,c), then
what can be said about the local extremum of f on (a,c)?

How are the absolute maximum and minimum similar to and different from
the local extrema?

The absolute maximum and minimum relate to the entire graph, whereas the
local extrema relate only to a specific region around an open interval.

How does the graph of the absolute value function compare to the graph
of the quadratic function, y= x 2 , in terms of increasing and
decreasing intervals?

## Algebraic {#fs-id1165134259215}

For the following exercises, find the average rate of change of each
function on the interval specified for real numbers b or h in simplest
form.

f( x )=4 x 2 −7 on \[1,b\]

4( b+1 )

g( x )=2 x 2 −9 on \[ 4,b \]

p( x )=3x+4 on \[2,2+h\]

3

k( x )=4x−2 on \[3,3+h\]

f( x )=2 x 2 +1 on \[x,x+h\]

4x+2h

g( x )=3 x 2 −2 on \[x,x+h\]

a( t )= 1 t+4 on \[9,9+h\]

−1 13( 13+h )

b( x )= 1 x+3 on \[1,1+h\]

j( x )=3 x 3 on \[1,1+h\]

3 h 2 +9h+9

r( t )=4 t 3 on \[2,2+h\]

Find f( x+h )−f( x ) h given f( x )=2 x 2 −3x on \[x,x+h\]

4x+2h−3

## Graphical {#fs-id1165135409367}

For the following exercises, consider the graph of f shown in [\#](#).

<figure id="Figure_01_03_201">

</figure>

Estimate the average rate of change from x=1 to x=4.

Estimate the average rate of change from x=2 to x=5.

4 3

For the following exercises, use the graph of each function to estimate
the intervals on which the function is increasing or decreasing.

increasing on ( −∞,−2.5 )∪( 1,∞ ), decreasing on (−2.5,1)

increasing on ( −∞,1 )∪( 3,4 ), decreasing on ( 1,3 )∪( 4,∞ )

For the following exercises, consider the graph shown in [\#](#).

<figure id="Figure_01_03_206">

</figure>

Estimate the intervals where the function is increasing or decreasing.

Estimate the point(s) at which the graph of f has a local maximum or a
local minimum.

local maximum: (−3,60), local minimum: (3,−60)

For the following exercises, consider the graph in [\#](#).

<figure id="Figure_01_03_207">

</figure>

If the complete graph of the function is shown, estimate the intervals
where the function is increasing or decreasing.

If the complete graph of the function is shown, estimate the absolute
maximum and absolute minimum.

absolute maximum at approximately (7,150), absolute minimum at
approximately (−7.5,−220)

## Numeric {#fs-id1165134043819}

[\#](#) gives the annual sales (in millions of dollars) of a product
from 1998 to 2006. What was the average rate of change of annual sales
(a) between 2001 and 2002, and (b) between 2001 and 2004?

   *Year*   *Sales (millions of dollars)*
  -------- -------------------------------
    1998                 201
    1999                 219
    2000                 233
    2001                 243
    2002                 249
    2003                 251
    2004                 249
    2005                 243
    2006                 233

[\#](#) gives the population of a town (in thousands) from 2000 to 2008.
What was the average rate of change of population (a) between 2002 and
2004, and (b) between 2002 and 2006?

   *Year*   *Population(thousands)*
  -------- -------------------------
    2000              87
    2001              84
    2002              83
    2003              80
    2004              77
    2005              76
    2006              78
    2007              81
    2008              85

ⓐ

--3000

ⓑ

--1250

For the following exercises, find the average rate of change of each
function on the interval specified.

f( x )= x 2 on \[1,5\]

h( x )=5−2 x 2 on \[−2,4\]

-4

q( x )= x 3 on \[−4,2\]

g( x )=3 x 3 −1 on \[−3,3\]

27

y= 1 x on \[1,3\]

p( t )= ( t 2 −4 )( t+1 ) t 2 +3 on \[−3,1\]

--0.167

k( t )=6 t 2 + 4 t 3 on \[−1,3\]

## Technology {#fs-id1165135347321}

For the following exercises, use a graphing utility to estimate the
local extrema of each function and to estimate the intervals on which
the function is increasing and decreasing.

f( x )= x 4 −4 x 3 +5

Local minimum at (3,−22), decreasing on (−∞,3), increasing on (3,∞)

h( x )= x 5 +5 x 4 +10 x 3 +10 x 2 −1

g( t )=t t+3

Local minimum at (−2,−2), decreasing on (−3,−2), increasing on (−2,∞)

k( t )=3 t 2 3 −t

m( x )= x 4 +2 x 3 −12 x 2 −10x+4

Local maximum at (−0.39,5.98), local minima at (−3.15,−47.62) and
(2.04,-32.04), decreasing on (−∞,−3.15)∪ (−0.39,2.04), increasing on
(−3.15,−0.39)∪ (2.04,∞)

n( x )= x 4 −8 x 3 +18 x 2 −6x+2

## Extension {#fs-id1165135536251}

The graph of the function f is shown in [\#](#).

<figure id="Figure_01_03_213">

</figure>

Based on the calculator screen shot, the point (1.333,5.185) is which of
the following?

ⓐ

a relative (local) maximum of the function

ⓑ

the vertex of the function

ⓒ

the absolute maximum of the function

ⓓ

a zero of the function

A

Let f(x)= 1 x . Find a number c such that the average rate of change of
the function f on the interval (1,c) is − 1 4 .

Let f( x )= 1 x . Find the number b such that the average rate of change
of f on the interval (2,b) is − 1 10 .

b=5

## Real-World Applications {#fs-id1165134151836}

At the start of a trip, the odometer on a car read 21,395. At the end of
the trip, 13.5 hours later, the odometer read 22,125. Assume the scale
on the odometer is in miles. What is the average speed the car traveled
during this trip?

A driver of a car stopped at a gas station to fill up their gas tank.
They looked at their watch, and the time read exactly 3:40 p.m. At this
time, they started pumping gas into the tank. At exactly 3:44, the tank
was full and the driver noticed that they had pumped 10.7 gallons. What
is the average rate of flow of the gasoline into the gas tank?

2.7 gallons per minute

Near the surface of the moon, the distance that an object falls is a
function of time. It is given by d( t )=2.6667 t 2 , where t is in
seconds and d( t ) is in feet. If an object is dropped from a certain
height, find the average velocity of the object from t=1 to t=2.

The graph in [\#](#) illustrates the decay of a radioactive substance
over t days.

<figure id="Figure_01_03_214">

</figure>

Use the graph to estimate the average decay rate from t=5 to t=15.

approximately --0.6 milligrams per day

# 

absolute maximum

the greatest value of a function over an interval

absolute minimum

the lowest value of a function over an interval

average rate of change

the difference in the output values of a function found for two values
of the input divided by the difference between the inputs

decreasing function

a function is decreasing in some open interval if

f

(

b

)

\<

f

(

a

)

for any two input values

a

and

b

in the given interval where

b

\>

a

increasing function

a function is increasing in some open interval if

f

(

b

)

\>

f

(

a

)

for any two input values

a

and

b

in the given interval where

b

\>

a

local extrema

collectively, all of a function\'s local maxima and minima

local maximum

a value of the input where a function changes from increasing to
decreasing as the input value increases.

local minimum

a value of the input where a function changes from decreasing to
increasing as the input value increases.

rate of change

the change of an output quantity relative to the change of the input
quantity

[^1]: http://www.eia.gov/totalenergy/data/annual/showtext.cfm?t=ptb0524.
    Accessed 3/5/2014.
