m51265

> In this section, you will:
>
> Combine functions using algebraic operations.
>
> Create a new function by composition of functions.
>
> Evaluate composite functions.
>
> Find the domain of a composite function.
>
> Decompose a composite function into its component functions.

8a4fc477-43da-4fc4-9ff0-19a7fae5a19d

#  {#fs-idm345799888}

## Learning Objectives {#fs-idm336489568}

Find the value of a function (IA 3.5.3), (CA 3.1.2)

## Objective 1: Find the value of a function (IA 3.5.3), (CA 3.1.2) {#fs-idm380345472}

A function is a relation that assigns to each element in its domain
exactly one element in the range. For each ordered pair in the relation,
each x -value is matched with only one y -value. The notation y=f(x)
 defines a function named f .  This is read as " y  is a function of x
." The letter x  represents the input value, or independent variable.
The letter y, or f(x) , represents the output value, or dependent
variable.

:::: {#fs-id1167824735502 .note}
::: title
Function Notation
:::

For the function y = f ( x )

f is the name of the function. x is the input value, the collection of
possible input values make up the domain. f(x) is the output value, the
collection of possible output values make up the range.

We read f ( x ) as *f* of *x* or the value of *f* at *x* .
::::

:::: {#eip-417 .example}
::: title
Evaluating and Solving a Function Represented in Table Form
:::

ⓐ

Evaluate

g

(

3

)

ⓑ

Solve

g

(

n

)

=

6

  ------ --- --- --- --- ---
  n      1   2   3   4   5
  g(n)   8   6   7   6   8
  ------ --- --- --- --- ---

ⓐ

Evaluating

g

\(3\) means determining the output value of the function

g

for the input value of

n

=3. The table output value corresponding to

n

=3 is 7, so

g

(3)=7.

ⓑ

Solving

g

(

n

)=6 means identifying the input values,

n

, that produce an output value of 6. The table shows two values where

g

(

n

) = 6 at

x

=2 and 4.
::::

### Practice Makes Perfect {#eip-101}

Find the value of a function.

Given the function k(t)=2t-1:

ⓐ

Evaluate

k

(

2

)

ⓑ

Solve

k

(

t

)

=

7

Given the function f(x)=x+2 :

ⓐ

Evaluate

f

(

7

)

ⓑ

Solve

f

(

x

)

=

4

For the function f(x)=2x2+3x+1 , find

ⓐ

f

(

3

)

ⓑ

f

(

--2

)

ⓒ

f

(

t

)

ⓓ

The value(s) of

x

that make

f

(

x

)

=

1

Use the table below to help answer the following:

  ------ --- ---- ---- ---- ----
  *x*    1   2    3    4    5
  g(x)   5   12   21   32   45
  ------ --- ---- ---- ---- ----

ⓐ

Evaluate

g

(

4

)

ⓑ

Solve

g

(

x

)

=

32

##  {#eip-100}

A composite function is a two-step function and can have numerical or
variable inputs.

x→g→g(x)→f→f(g(x))

(f∘g)(x)=f(g(x))  is read as "*f* of *g* of *x*"

To evaluate a composite function, we always start evaluating the inner
function and then evaluate the outer function in terms of the inner
function.

Let's use a table to help us organize our work in evaluating a two-step
(composition) function in terms of some numerical inputs.

First evaluate *g* in terms of *x*, the *f* in terms of *g*(*x*).

Given that: g(x)=3x-1 , and f(x)=x2+1 , complete the table below.
Remember the output of *g*(*x*) becomes the input of *f*(*x*)!

  ----- ----------- -------------------
  *x*   g(x)=3x-1   f(g(x))=(g(x))2+1
  --1               
  --3               
  0                 
  4                 
  10                
  ----- ----------- -------------------

### Practice Makes Perfect {#eip-idm656598016}

Use the table below showing values of f(x) and g(x) to find each of the
following. Remember when working with composition functions we always
evaluate the inner function first.

  ------ ----- ----- ----- --- --- ----- -----
  x      --3   --2   --1   0   1   2     3
  f(x)   11    9     7     5   3   1     --1
  g(x)   --8   --3   0     1   0   --3   --8
  ------ ----- ----- ----- --- --- ----- -----

ⓐ

f

(

1

)

=

ⓑ

g

(

f

(

1

)

)

=

ⓒ

g

(

0

)

=

ⓓ

f

(

g

(

0

)

)

=

ⓔ

f

(

g

(

2

)

)

=

ⓕ

f

(

f

(

3

)

)

=

Suppose we want to calculate how much it costs to heat a house on a
particular day of the year. The cost to heat a house will depend on the
average daily temperature, and in turn, the average daily temperature
depends on the particular day of the year. Notice how we have just
defined two relationships: The cost depends on the temperature, and the
temperature depends on the day.

Using descriptive variables, we can notate these two functions. The
function C( T ) gives the cost C of heating a house for a given average
daily temperature in T degrees Celsius. The function T( d ) gives the
average daily temperature on day d of the year. For any given day,
Cost=C( T( d ) ) means that the cost depends on the temperature, which
in turns depends on the day of the year. Thus, we can evaluate the cost
function at the temperature T( d ). For example, we could evaluate T( 5
) to determine the average daily temperature on the 5th day of the year.
Then, we could evaluate the cost function at that temperature. We would
write C( T( 5 ) ).

By combining these two relationships into one function, we have
performed function composition, which is the focus of this section.

# Combining Functions Using Algebraic Operations {#fs-id1165135176393}

Function composition is only one way to combine existing functions.
Another way is to carry out the usual algebraic operations on functions,
such as addition, subtraction, multiplication and division. We do this
by performing the operations with the function outputs, defining the
result as the output of our new function.

Suppose we need to add two columns of numbers that represent a husband
and wife's separate annual incomes over a period of years, with the
result being their total household income. We want to do this for every
year, adding only that year's incomes and then collecting all the data
in a new column. If w(y) is the wife's income and h(y) is the husband's
income in year y, and we want T to represent the total income, then we
can define a new function.

$$T(y) = h(y) + w(y)$$

If this holds true for every year, then we can focus on the relation
between the functions without reference to a year and write

$$T = h + w$$

Just as for this sum of two functions, we can define difference,
product, and ratio functions for any pair of functions that have the
same kinds of inputs (not necessarily numbers) and also the same kinds
of outputs (which do have to be numbers so that the usual operations of
algebra can apply to them, and which also must have the same units or no
units when we add and subtract). In this way, we can think of adding,
subtracting, multiplying, and dividing functions.

For two functions f( x ) and g( x ) with real number outputs, we define
new functions f+g,f−g,fg, and f g by the relations

$$\begin{array}{rclc}
{(f + g)(x)} & = & {f(x) + g(x)} & \\
{(f - g)(x)} & = & {f(x) - g(x)} & \\
{~(fg)(x)} & = & {f(x)g(x)} & \\
{\left( \frac{f}{g} \right)(x)} & = & \frac{f(x)}{g(x)} & {\text{where}\mspace{9mu} g(x)\mspace{9mu} \neq \mspace{9mu} 0}
\end{array}$$

::: {#Example_01_04_01 .example}
Find and simplify the functions ( g−f )( x ) and ( g f )( x ), given f(
x )=x−1 and g( x )= x 2 −1. Are they the same function?

Begin by writing the general form, and then substitute the given
functions.

$$\begin{matrix}
{(g - f)(x)} & = & {g(x) - f(x)} & \\
{(g - f)(x)} & = & {x^{2} - 1 - (x - 1)} & \\
{(g - f)(x)} & = & {x^{2} - x} & \\
{(g - f)(x)} & = & {x(x - 1)} & \\
 & & & \\
 & & & \\
{\operatorname{}\left( \frac{g}{f} \right)(x)} & = & \frac{g(x)}{f(x)} & \\
{\left( \frac{g}{f} \right)(x)} & = & \frac{x^{2} - 1}{x - 1} & \\
{\operatorname{}\left( \frac{g}{f} \right)(x)} & = & \frac{(x + 1)(x - 1)}{x - 1} & {\text{where}x \neq 1} \\
{\operatorname{}\left( \frac{g}{f} \right)(x)} & = & {x + 1} & 
\end{matrix}$$

No, the functions are not the same.

Note: For ( g f )( x ), the condition x≠1 is necessary because when x=1,
the denominator is equal to 0, which makes the function undefined.
:::

:::: {#fs-id1165137564163 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Find and simplify the functions ( fg )( x ) and ( f−g )( x ).

$$f(x) = x - 1\mspace{9mu}\text{~~~and~~~~}g(x) = x^{2} - 1$$

Are they the same function?

( fg )( x )=f( x )g( x )=( x−1 )( x 2 −1 )= x 3 − x 2 −x+1 ( f−g )( x
)=f( x )−g( x )=( x−1 )−( x 2 −1 )=x− x 2

No, the functions are not the same.
::::

# Create a Function by Composition of Functions {#fs-id1165135690697}

Performing algebraic operations on functions combines them into a new
function, but we can also create functions by composing functions. When
we wanted to compute a heating cost from a day of the year, we created a
new function that takes a day as input and yields a cost as output. The
process of combining functions so that the output of one function
becomes the input of another is known as a composition of functions*.*
The resulting function is known as a *composite function*. We represent
this combination by the following notation:

$$\left( {f \circ g} \right)(x) = f\left( {g(x)} \right)$$

We read the left-hand side as "f composed with g at x," and the
right-hand side as "f of g of x." The two sides of the equation have the
same mathematical meaning and are equal. The open circle symbol ∘ is
called the composition operator. We use this operator mainly when we
wish to emphasize the relationship between the functions themselves
without referring to any particular input value. Composition is a binary
operation that takes two functions and forms a new function, much as
addition or multiplication takes two numbers and gives a new number.
However, it is important not to confuse function composition with
multiplication because, as we learned above, in most cases
f(g(x))≠f(x)g(x).

It is also important to understand the order of operations in evaluating
a composite function. We follow the usual convention with parentheses by
starting with the innermost parentheses first, and then working to the
outside. In the equation above, the function g takes the input x first
and yields an output g( x ). Then the function f takes g( x ) as an
input and yields an output f( g( x ) ).

In general, f∘g and g∘f are different functions. In other words, in many
cases f( g( x ) )≠g( f( x ) ) for all x. We will also see that sometimes
two functions can be composed only in one specific order.

For example, if f( x )= x 2 and g( x )=x+2, then

$$\begin{array}{ccl}
{f(g(x))} & = & {f(x + 2)} \\
 & = & {(x + 2)}^{2} \\
 & = & {x^{2} + 4x + 4}
\end{array}$$

but

$$\begin{array}{ccl}
{g(f(x))} & = & {g\left( x^{2} \right)} \\
 & = & {x^{2} + 2}
\end{array}$$

These expressions are not equal for all values of x, so the two
functions are not equal. It is irrelevant that the expressions happen to
be equal for the single input value x=− 1 2 .

Note that the range of the inside function (the first function to be
evaluated) needs to be within the domain of the outside function. Less
formally, the composition has to make sense in terms of inputs and
outputs.

:::: {#fs-id1165134190746 .note}
::: title
Composition of Functions
:::

When the output of one function is used as the input of another, we call
the entire operation a composition of functions. For any input x and
functions f and g, this action defines a composite function, which we
write as f∘g such that

$$\left( {f \circ g} \right)(x) = f\left( {g(x)} \right)$$

The domain of the composite function f∘g is all x such that x is in the
domain of g and g( x ) is in the domain of f.

It is important to realize that the product of functions fg is not the
same as the function composition f( g( x ) ), because, in general, f( x
)g( x )≠f( g( x ) ).
::::

::: {#Example_01_04_02 .example}
Using the functions provided, find f( g( x ) ) and g( f( x ) ).
Determine whether the composition of the functions is commutative.

$$f(x) = 2x + 1\mspace{9mu}\mspace{9mu}\mspace{9mu}\mspace{9mu}\mspace{9mu}\mspace{9mu}\mspace{9mu}\mspace{9mu}\mspace{9mu}\mspace{9mu}\mspace{9mu}\mspace{9mu}\mspace{9mu} g(x) = 3 - x$$

Let's begin by substituting g( x ) into f( x ).

$$\begin{array}{ccl}
{f(g(x))} & = & {2(3 - x) + 1} \\
 & = & {6 - 2x + 1} \\
 & = & {7 - 2x}
\end{array}$$

Now we can substitute f( x ) into g( x ).

$$\begin{array}{ccl}
{g(f(x))} & = & {3 - (2x + 1)} \\
 & = & {3 - 2x - 1} \\
 & = & {-2x + 2}
\end{array}$$

We find that g(f(x))≠f(g(x)), so the operation of function composition
is not commutative.
:::

::: {#Example_01_04_03 .example}
The function c(s) gives the number of calories burned completing s
sit-ups, and s(t) gives the number of sit-ups a person can complete in t
minutes. Interpret c(s(3)).

The inside expression in the composition is s(3). Because the input to
the *s*-function is time, t=3 represents 3 minutes, and s(3) is the
number of sit-ups completed in 3 minutes.

Using s(3) as the input to the function c(s) gives us the number of
calories burned during the number of sit-ups that can be completed in 3
minutes, or simply the number of calories burned in 3 minutes (by doing
sit-ups).
:::

::: {#Example_01_04_04 .example}
Suppose f(x) gives miles that can be driven in x hours and g(y) gives
the gallons of gas used in driving y miles. Which of these expressions
is meaningful: f( g(y) ) or g( f(x) )?

The function y=f( x ) is a function whose output is the number of miles
driven corresponding to the number of hours driven.

$$\text{number~of~miles~} = f\mspace{9mu}(\text{number~of~hours})$$

The function g( y ) is a function whose output is the number of gallons
used corresponding to the number of miles driven. This means:

$$\text{number~of~gallons~} = g\mspace{9mu}(\text{number~of~miles})$$

The expression g(y) takes miles as the input and a number of gallons as
the output. The function f(x) requires a number of hours as the input.
Trying to input a number of gallons does not make sense. The expression
f( g(y) ) is meaningless.

The expression f(x) takes hours as input and a number of miles driven as
the output. The function g(y) requires a number of miles as the input.
Using f(x) (miles driven) as an input value for g(y), where gallons of
gas depends on miles driven, does make sense. The expression g( f(x) )
makes sense, and will yield the number of gallons of gas used, g,
driving a certain number of miles, f(x), in x hours.
:::

:::: {#fs-id1165137768571 .note}
::: title
:::

Q&A

Are there any situations where f(g(y)) and g(f(x)) would both be
meaningful or useful expressions?

*Yes. For many pure mathematical functions, both compositions make
sense, even though they usually produce different new functions. In
real-world problems, functions whose inputs and outputs have the same
units also may give compositions that are meaningful in either order.*
::::

:::: {#fs-id1165134558042 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

The gravitational force on a planet a distance *r* from the sun is given
by the function G(r). The acceleration of a planet subjected to any
force F is given by the function a(F). Form a meaningful composition of
these two functions, and explain what it means.

A gravitational force is still a force, so a( G(r) ) makes sense as the
acceleration of a planet at a distance *r* from the Sun (due to
gravity), but G( a(F) ) does not make sense.
::::

# Evaluating Composite Functions {#fs-id1165137560475}

Once we compose a new function from two existing functions, we need to
be able to evaluate it for any input in its domain. We will do this with
specific numerical inputs for functions expressed as tables, graphs, and
formulas and with variables as inputs to functions expressed as
formulas. In each case, we evaluate the inner function using the
starting input and then use the inner function's output as the input for
the outer function.

## Evaluating Composite Functions Using Tables {#fs-id1165137760886}

When working with functions given as tables, we read input and output
values from the table entries and always work from the inside to the
outside. We evaluate the inside function first and then use the output
of the inside function as the input to the outside function.

::: {#Example_01_04_05 .example}
Using [\#](#), evaluate f(g(3)) and g(f(3)).

  -----------------------------------------------------------------------
             x                     f(x)                    g(x)
  ----------------------- ----------------------- -----------------------
             1                       6                       3

             2                       8                       5

             3                       3                       2

             4                       1                       7
  -----------------------------------------------------------------------

To evaluate f(g(3)), we start from the inside with the input value 3. We
then evaluate the inside expression g(3) using the table that defines
the function g: g(3)=2. We can then use that result as the input to the
function f, so g(3) is replaced by 2 and we get f(2). Then, using the
table that defines the function f, we find that f(2)=8.

$$\begin{array}{rcl}
{g(3)} & = & 2 \\
{f(g(3))} & = & {f(2) = 8}
\end{array}$$

To evaluate g(f(3)), we first evaluate the inside expression f(3) using
the first table: f(3)=3. Then, using the table for g,  we can evaluate

$$g(f(3)) = g(3) = 2$$

[\#](#) shows the composite functions f∘g and g∘f as tables.

  -------------- -------------- -------------- -------------- --------------
        x            g( x )      f( g( x ) )       f( x )      g( f( x ) )

        3              2              8              3              2
  -------------- -------------- -------------- -------------- --------------
:::

:::: {#fs-id1165137724943 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Using [\#](#), evaluate f(g(1)) and g(f(4)).

f(g(1))=f(3)=3 and g(f(4))=g(1)=3
::::

## Evaluating Composite Functions Using Graphs {#fs-id1165137756068}

When we are given individual functions as graphs, the procedure for
evaluating composite functions is similar to the process we use for
evaluating tables. We read the input and output values, but this time,
from the x- and y- axes of the graphs.

:::: {#fs-id1165137634364 .note}
::: title
:::

How To

*Given a composite function and graphs of its individual functions,
evaluate it using the information provided by the graphs.*

Locate the given input to the inner function on the

x

\-

axis of its graph.

Read off the output of the inner function from the

y

\-

axis of its graph.

Locate the inner function output on the

x

\-

axis of the graph of the outer function.

Read the output of the outer function from the

y

\-

axis of its graph. This is the output of the composite function.
::::

::: {#Example_01_04_06 .example}
Using [\#](#), evaluate f(g(1)).

<figure id="Figure_01_04_002">

</figure>

To evaluate f(g(1)), we start with the inside evaluation. See [\#](#).

<figure id="Figure_01_04_004">

</figure>

We evaluate g(1) using the graph of g(x), finding the input of 1 on the
x- axis and finding the output value of the graph at that input. Here,
g(1)=3. We use this value as the input to the function f.

$$f(g(1)) = f(3)$$

We can then evaluate the composite function by looking to the graph of
f(x), finding the input of 3 on the x- axis and reading the output value
of the graph at this input. Here, f(3)=6, so f(g(1))=6.

[\#](#) shows how we can mark the graphs with arrows to trace the path
from the input value to the output value.

<figure id="Figure_01_04_005">

</figure>
:::

:::: {#fs-id1165137723402 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Using [\#](#), evaluate g(f(2)).

g(f(2))=g(5)=3
::::

## Evaluating Composite Functions Using Formulas {#fs-id1165137452389}

When evaluating a composite function where we have either created or
been given formulas, the rule of working from the inside out remains the
same. The input value to the outer function will be the output of the
inner function, which may be a numerical value, a variable name, or a
more complicated expression.

While we can compose the functions for each individual input value, it
is sometimes helpful to find a single formula that will calculate the
result of a composition f( g( x ) ). To do this, we will extend our idea
of function evaluation. Recall that, when we evaluate a function like
f(t)= t 2 −t, we substitute the value inside the parentheses into the
formula wherever we see the input variable.

:::: {#fs-id1165137584280 .note}
::: title
:::

How To

*Given a formula for a composite function, evaluate the function.*

Evaluate the inside function using the input value or variable provided.

Use the resulting output as the input to the outside function.
::::

::: {#Example_01_04_07 .example}
Given f(t)= t 2 −t and h(x)=3x+2, evaluate f(h(1)).

Because the inside expression is h(1), we start by evaluating h(x) at 1.

$$\begin{array}{rcl}
{h(1)} & = & {3(1) + 2} \\
{h(1)} & = & 5
\end{array}$$

Then f(h(1))=f(5), so we evaluate f(t) at an input of 5.

$$\begin{array}{rcl}
{f(h(1))} & = & {f(5)} \\
{f(h(1))} & = & {5^{2} - 5} \\
{f(h(1))} & = & 20
\end{array}$$

It makes no difference what the input variables t and x were called in
this problem because we evaluated for specific numerical values.
:::

:::: {#fs-id1165137570158 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Given f(t)= t 2 −t and h(x)=3x+2, evaluate

ⓐ

h

(

f

(

2

)

)

ⓑ

h

(

f

(

−

2

)

)

ⓐ

8

ⓑ

20
::::

# Finding the Domain of a Composite Function {#fs-id1165135567444}

As we discussed previously, the domain of a composite function such as
f∘g is dependent on the domain of g and the domain of f. It is important
to know when we can apply a composite function and when we cannot, that
is, to know the domain of a function such as f∘g. Let us assume we know
the domains of the functions f and g separately. If we write the
composite function for an input x as f( g( x ) ), we can see right away
that x must be a member of the domain of g in order for the expression
to be meaningful, because otherwise we cannot complete the inner
function evaluation. However, we also see that g( x ) must be a member
of the domain of f, otherwise the second function evaluation in f( g( x
) ) cannot be completed, and the expression is still undefined. Thus the
domain of f∘g consists of only those inputs in the domain of g that
produce outputs from g belonging to the domain of f. Note that the
domain of f composed with g is the set of all x such that x is in the
domain of g and g( x ) is in the domain of f.

:::: {#fs-id1165135547254 .note}
::: title
Domain of a Composite Function
:::

The domain of a composite function f( g( x ) ) is the set of those
inputs x in the domain of g for which g( x ) is in the domain of f.
::::

:::: {#fs-id1165137663970 .note}
::: title
:::

How To

*Given a function composition f(g(x)), determine its domain.*

Find the domain of

g

.

Find the domain of

f

.

Find those inputs

x

in the domain of

g

for which

g

(

x

)

is in the domain of

f

.

That is, exclude those inputs

x

from the domain of

g

for which

g

(

x

)

is not in the domain of

f

.

The resulting set is the domain of

f

∘

g

.
::::

::: {#Example_01_04_08 .example}
Find the domain of

$$\left( {f \circ g} \right)(x)\mspace{9mu}\text{where}\mspace{9mu}\mspace{9mu}\mspace{9mu}\mspace{9mu}\mspace{9mu}\mspace{9mu} f(x) = \frac{5}{x - 1}\mspace{9mu}\text{and}\mspace{9mu}\mspace{9mu} g(x) = \frac{4}{3x - 2}$$

The domain of g( x ) consists of all real numbers except x= 2 3 , since
that input value would cause us to divide by 0. Likewise, the domain of
f consists of all real numbers except 1. So we need to exclude from the
domain of g( x ) that value of x for which g( x )=1.

$$\begin{array}{rcl}
\frac{4}{3x - 2} & = & 1 \\
4 & = & {3x - 2} \\
6 & = & {3x} \\
x & = & 2
\end{array}$$

So the domain of f∘g is the set of all real numbers except 2 3 and 2.
This means that

$$x \neq \frac{2}{3}\mspace{9mu}\text{or}\mspace{9mu} x \neq 2$$

We can write this in interval notation as

$$\left( {- \infty,\frac{2}{3}} \right) \cup \left( {\frac{2}{3},2} \right) \cup \left( {2,\infty} \right)$$
:::

::: {#Example_01_04_09 .example}
Find the domain of

$$\left( {f \circ g} \right)(x)\mspace{9mu}\text{~where}\mspace{9mu}\mspace{9mu}\mspace{9mu}\mspace{9mu}\mspace{9mu}\mspace{9mu} f(x) = \sqrt{x + 2}\mspace{9mu}\text{~and~~}\mspace{9mu} g(x) = \sqrt{3 - x}$$

Because we cannot take the square root of a negative number, the domain
of g is ( −∞,3 \]. Now we check the domain of the composite function

$${(f \circ g)(x)} = \sqrt{\sqrt{3 - x} + 2}$$

For ( f∘g )(x)= 3−x+2 , 3−x+2 ≥0, since the radicand of a square root
must be positive. Since square roots are positive, 3−x ≥0 , or, 3−x ≥0,
which gives a domain of (-∞,3\] .

This example shows that knowledge of the range of functions
(specifically the inner function) can also be helpful in finding the
domain of a composite function. It also shows that the domain of f∘g can
contain values that are not in the domain of f, though they must be in
the domain of g.
:::

:::: {#fs-id1165135435597 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Find the domain of

$$\left( {f \circ g} \right)(x)\mspace{9mu}\text{~where}\mspace{9mu}\mspace{9mu}\mspace{9mu}\mspace{9mu}\mspace{9mu}\mspace{9mu} f(x) = \frac{1}{x - 2}\mspace{9mu}\text{~and~~}\mspace{9mu} g(x) = \sqrt{x + 4}$$

\[ −4,0 )∪( 0,∞ )
::::

# Decomposing a Composite Function into its Component Functions {#fs-id1165137425738}

In some cases, it is necessary to decompose a complicated function. In
other words, we can write it as a composition of two simpler functions.
There may be more than one way to decompose a composite function, so we
may choose the decomposition that appears to be most expedient.

::: {#Example_01_04_10 .example}
Write f(x)= 5− x 2 as the composition of two functions.

We are looking for two functions, g and h, so f(x)=g(h(x)). To do this,
we look for a function inside a function in the formula for f(x). As one
possibility, we might notice that the expression 5− x 2 is the inside of
the square root. We could then decompose the function as

$$h(x) = 5 - x^{2}\mspace{9mu}\text{and~}g(x) = \sqrt{x}$$

We can check our answer by recomposing the functions.

$$g(h(x)) = g\left( {5 - x^{2}} \right) = \sqrt{5 - x^{2}}$$
:::

:::: {#fs-id1165131878633 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Write f(x)= 4 3− 4+ x 2 as the composition of two functions.

Possible answer:

g( x )= 4+ x 2 h( x )= 4 3−x f=h∘g
::::

:::: {#fs-id1165135699157 .note}
::: title
:::

Media

Access these online resources for additional instruction and practice
with composite functions.

Composite Functions

Composite Function Notation Application

Composite Functions Using Graphs

Decompose Functions

Composite Function Values
::::

# Key Equation {#fs-id1165135388428}

  -------------------- --------------------------
  Composite function   ( f∘g )( x )=f( g( x ) )
  -------------------- --------------------------

# Key Concepts {#fs-id1165137768015}

We can perform algebraic operations on functions. See

.

When functions are composed, the output of the first (inner) function
becomes the input of the second (outer) function.

The function produced by composing two functions is a composite
function. See

and

.

The order of function composition must be considered when interpreting
the meaning of composite functions. See

.

A composite function can be evaluated by evaluating the inner function
using the given input value and then evaluating the outer function
taking as its input the output of the inner function.

A composite function can be evaluated from a table. See

.

A composite function can be evaluated from a graph. See

.

A composite function can be evaluated from a formula. See

.

The domain of a composite function consists of those inputs in the
domain of the inner function that correspond to outputs of the inner
function that are in the domain of the outer function. See

and

.

Just as functions can be combined to form a composite function,
composite functions can be decomposed into simpler functions.

Functions can often be decomposed in more than one way. See

.

# Section Exercises {#fs-id1165137611819}

## Verbal {#fs-id1165135322014}

How does one find the domain of the quotient of two functions, f g ?

Find the numbers that make the function in the denominator g equal to
zero, and check for any other domain restrictions on f and g, such as an
even-indexed root or zeros in the denominator.

What is the composition of two functions, f∘g?

If the order is reversed when composing two functions, can the result
ever be the same as the answer in the original order of the composition?
If yes, give an example. If no, explain why not.

Yes. Sample answer: Let f(x)=x+1and g(x)=x−1. Then
f(g(x))=f(x−1)=(x−1)+1=x and g(f(x))=g(x+1)=(x+1)−1=x. So f∘g=g∘f.

How do you find the domain for the composition of two functions, f∘g?

## Algebraic {#fs-id1165137407457}

For the following exercises, determine the domain for each function in
interval notation.

Given f(x)= x 2 +2x and  g(x)=6− x 2 , find f+g,f−g,fg, and f g .

(f+g)( x )=2x+6, domain: (−∞,∞)

(f−g)( x )=2 x 2 +2x−6, domain: (−∞,∞)

(fg)( x )=− x 4 −2 x 3 +6 x 2 +12x, domain: (−∞,∞)

( f g )( x )= x 2 +2x 6− x 2 , domain: (−∞,− 6 )∪(− 6 , 6 )∪( 6 ,∞)

Given f(x)=−3 x 2 +x and g(x)=5, find f+g,f−g,fg, and f g .

Given f(x)=2 x 2 +4x and g(x)= 1 2x , find f+g,f−g,fg, and f g .

(f+g)( x )= 4 x 3 +8 x 2 +1 2x , domain: (−∞,0)∪(0,∞)

(f−g)( x )= 4 x 3 +8 x 2 −1 2x , domain: (−∞,0)∪(0,∞)

(fg)( x )=x+2, domain: (−∞,0)∪(0,∞)

( f g )( x )=4 x 3 +8 x 2 , domain: (−∞,0)∪(0,∞)

Given f(x)= 1 x−4 and g(x)= 1 6−x , find f+g,f−g,fg, and f g .

Given f(x)=3 x 2 and g(x)= x−5 , find f+g,f−g,fg, and f g .

(f+g)(x)=3 x 2 + x−5 , domain: \[5,∞)

(f−g)(x)=3 x 2 − x−5 , domain: \[5,∞)

(fg)(x)=3 x 2 x−5 , domain: \[5,∞)

( f g )(x)= 3 x 2 x−5 , domain: (5,∞)

Given f(x)= x and g(x)=\|x−3\|, find g f .

For the following exercise, find the indicated function given f(x)=2 x 2
+1 and g(x)=3x−5.

ⓐ

f

(

g

(

2

)

)

ⓑ

f

(

g

(

x

)

)

ⓒ

g

(

f

(

x

)

)

ⓓ

(

g

∘

g

)

(

x

)

ⓔ

(

f

∘

f

)

(

−

2

)

ⓐ

3

=

2

(

9

x

2

--

30

x

\+

25

)

\+

1

=

18

x

2

--

60

x

\+

51

ⓑ

f

(

g

(

x

)

)

=

2

(

3

x

−

5

)

2

\+

1

ⓒ

g

(

f

(

x

)

)

=

3

(

2

x

2

\+

1

)

\-

5

=

6

x

2

\-

2

ⓓ

(

g

∘

g

)

(

x

)

=

3

(

3

x

−

5

)

−

5

=

9

x

−

20

ⓔ

(

f

∘

f

)

(

−

2

)

=

163

For the following exercises, use each pair of functions to find f( g( x
) ) and g( f( x ) ). Simplify your answers.

f(x)= x 2 +1,g(x)= x+2

f(x)= x +2,g(x)= x 2 +3

f(g(x))= x 2 +3 +2,g(f(x))=x+4 x +7

f(x)=\| x \|,g(x)=5x+1

f(x)= x 3 ,g(x)= x+1 x 3

f(g(x))= x+1 x 3 3 = x+1 3 x ,g(f(x))= x 3 +1 x

f(x)= 1 x−6 ,g(x)= 7 x +6

f(x)= 1 x−4 ,g(x)= 2 x +4

( f∘g )(x)= 1 2 x +4−4 = x 2 ,( g∘f )(x)=2x−4

For the following exercises, use each set of functions to find f( g(
h(x) ) ). Simplify your answers.

f(x)= x 4 +6, g(x)=x−6, and h(x)= x

f(x)= x 2 +1, g(x)= 1 x , and h(x)=x+3

f(g(h(x)))= ( 1 x+3 ) 2 +1

Given f(x)= 1 x and g(x)=x−3, find the following:

ⓐ

(

f

∘

g

)

(

x

)

ⓑ

the domain of

(

f

∘

g

)

(

x

)

in interval notation

ⓒ

(

g

∘

f

)

(

x

)

ⓓ

the domain of

(

g

∘

f

)

(

x

)

ⓔ

(

f

g

)

(

x

)

Given f(x)= 2−4x and g(x)=− 3 x , find the following:

ⓐ

(

g

∘

f

)

(

x

)

ⓑ

the domain of

(

g

∘

f

)

(

x

)

in interval notation

ⓐ (g∘f)(x)=− 3 2−4x ⓑ ( −∞, 1 2 )

Given the functions f(x)= 1−x x andg(x)= 1 1+ x 2 , find the following:

ⓐ

(

g

∘

f

)

(

x

)

ⓑ

(

g

∘

f

)

(

2

)

Given functions p(x)= 1 x and m(x)= x 2 −4, state the domain of each of
the following functions using interval notation:

ⓐ

p

(

x

)

m

(

x

)

ⓑ

p

(

m

(

x

)

)

ⓒ

m

(

p

(

x

)

)

ⓐ (0,2)∪(2,∞); ⓑ (−∞,−2)∪(2,∞); ⓒ (0,∞)

Given functions q(x)= 1 x and h(x)= x 2 −9, state the domain of each of
the following functions using interval notation.

ⓐ

q

(

x

)

h

(

x

)

ⓑ

q

(

h

(

x

)

)

ⓒ

h

(

q

(

x

)

)

For f(x)= 1 x and g(x)= x−1 , write the domain of (f∘g)(x) in interval
notation.

(1,∞)

For the following exercises, find functions f(x) and g(x) so the given
function can be expressed as h(x)=f( g(x) ).

h(x)= (x+2) 2

h(x)= (x−5) 3

sample: f(x)= x 3 g(x)=x−5

h(x)= 3 x−5

h(x)= 4 (x+2) 2

sample: f(x)= 4 x g(x)= (x+2) 2

h(x)=4+ x 3

h(x)= 1 2x−3 3

sample: f(x)= x 3 g(x)= 1 2x−3

h(x)= 1 (3 x 2 −4) −3

h(x)= 3x−2 x+5 4

sample: f(x)= x 4 g(x)= 3x−2 x+5

h(x)= ( 8+ x 3 8− x 3 ) 4

h(x)= 2x+6

sample: f(x)= x g(x)=2x+6

h(x)= (5x−1) 3

h(x)= x−1 3

sample: f(x)= x 3 g(x)=(x−1)

h(x)=\| x 2 +7 \|

h(x)= 1 (x−2) 3

sample: f(x)= x 3 g(x)= 1 x−2

h(x)= ( 1 2x−3 ) 2

h(x)= 2x−1 3x+4

sample: f(x)= x g(x)= 2x−1 3x+4

## Graphical {#fs-id1165134250814}

For the following exercises, use the graphs of f, shown in [\#](#), and
g, shown in [\#](#), to evaluate the expressions.

<figure id="Figure_01_04_201">

</figure>

<figure id="Figure_01_04_202">

</figure>

f( g(3) )

f( g(1) )

2

g( f(1) )

g( f(0) )

5

f( f(5) )

f( f(4) )

4

g( g(2) )

g( g(0) )

0

For the following exercises, use graphs of f(x), shown in [\#](#), g(x),
shown in [\#](#), and h(x), shown in [\#](#), to evaluate the
expressions.

<figure id="Figure_01_04_203">

</figure>

<figure id="Figure_01_04_204">

</figure>

<figure id="Figure_01_04_205">

</figure>

g( f( 1 ) )

g( f( 2 ) )

2

f( g( 4 ) )

f( g( 1 ) )

1

f( h( 2 ) )

h( f( 2 ) )

4

f( g( h( 4 ) ) )

f( g( f( −2 ) ) )

4

## Numeric {#fs-id1165137413913}

For the following exercises, use the function values for fand g shown in
[\#](#) to evaluate each expression.

    *x*     *f(x)*     *g(x)*
  ------- ---------- ----------
     0        7          9
     1        6          5
     2        5          6
     3        8          2
     4        4          1
     5        0          8
     6        2          7
     7        1          3
     8        9          4
     9        3          0

f( g( 8 ) )

f( g( 5 ) )

9

g( f( 5 ) )

g( f( 3 ) )

4

f( f( 4 ) )

f( f( 1 ) )

2

g( g( 2 ) )

g( g( 6 ) )

3

For the following exercises, use the function values for fand g shown in
[\#](#) to evaluate the expressions.

  *x*     *f(x)*     *g(x)*
  ------- ---------- ----------
  −3      11         −8
  −2      9          −3
  −1      7          0
  0       5          1
  1       3          0
  2       1          −3
  3       −1         −8

(f∘g)(1)

(f∘g)(2)

11

(g∘f)(2)

(g∘f)(3)

0

(g∘g)(1)

(f∘f)(3)

7

For the following exercises, use each pair of functions to find f( g( 0
) ) and g( f(0) ).

f(x)=4x+8,g(x)=7− x 2

f(x)=5x+7,g(x)=4−2 x 2

f(g(0))=27,g( f(0) )=−94

f(x)= x+4 ,g(x)=12− x 3

f(x)= 1 x+2 ,g(x)=4x+3

f(g(0))= 1 5 ,g(f(0))=5

For the following exercises, use the functions f(x)=2 x 2 +1 and
g(x)=3x+5 to evaluate or find the composite function as indicated.

f( g(2) )

f( g(x) )

18 x 2 +60x+51

g( f(−3) )

(g∘g)(x)

g∘g(x)=9x+20

## Extensions {#fs-id1165137812338}

For the following exercises, use f(x)= x 3 +1 and g(x)= x−1 3 .

Find (f∘g)(x) and (g∘f)(x). Compare the two answers.

Find (f∘g)(2) and (g∘f)(2).

2

What is the domain of (g∘f)(x)?

What is the domain of (f∘g)(x)?

(−∞,∞)

Let f(x)= 1 x .

ⓐ

Find

(

f

∘

f

)

(

x

)

.

ⓑ

Is

(

f

∘

f

)

(

x

)

for any function

f

the same result as the answer to part (a) for any function? Explain.

For the following exercises, let F(x)= (x+1) 5 , f(x)= x 5 , and
g(x)=x+1.

True or False: (g∘f)(x)=F(x).

False

True or False: (f∘g)(x)=F(x).

For the following exercises, find the composition when f(x)= x 2 +2 for
all x≥0 and g(x)= x−2 .

(f∘g)(6);(g∘f)(6)

(f∘g)(6)=6 ; (g∘f)(6)=6

(g∘f)(a);(f∘g)(a)

(f∘g)(11);(g∘f)(11)

(f∘g)(11)=11,(g∘f)(11)=11

## Real-World Applications {#fs-id1165135341286}

The function D(p) gives the number of items that will be demanded when
the price is p. The production cost C(x) is the cost of producing x
items. To determine the cost of production when the price is \$6, you
would do which of the following?

ⓐ

Evaluate

D

(

C

(

6

)

)

.

ⓑ

Evaluate

C

(

D

(

6

)

)

.

ⓒ

Solve

D

(

C

(

x

)

)

=

6\.

ⓓ

Solve

C

(

D

(

p

)

)

=

6\.

The function A(d) gives the pain level on a scale of 0 to 10 experienced
by a patient with d milligrams of a pain-reducing drug in her system.
The milligrams of the drug in the patient's system after t minutes is
modeled by m(t). Which of the following would you do in order to
determine when the patient will be at a pain level of 4?

ⓐ

Evaluate

A

(

m

(

4

)

)

.

ⓑ

Evaluate

m

(

A

(

4

)

)

.

ⓒ

Solve

A

(

m

(

t

)

)

=

4\.

ⓓ

Solve

m

(

A

(

d

)

)

=

4\.

c

A store offers customers a 30% discount on the price x of selected
items. Then, the store takes off an additional 15% at the cash register.
Write a price function P(x) that computes the final price of the item in
terms of the original price x. (Hint: Use function composition to find
your answer.)

A rain drop hitting a lake makes a circular ripple. If the radius, in
inches, grows as a function of time in minutes according to r(t)=25 t+2
, find the area of the ripple as a function of time. Find the area of
the ripple at t=2.

A(t)=π ( 25 t+2 ) 2 and A(2)=π ( 25 4 ) 2 =2500π square inches

A forest fire leaves behind an area of grass burned in an expanding
circular pattern. If the radius of the circle of burning grass is
increasing with time according to the formula r(t)=2t+1, express the
area burned as a function of time, t (minutes).

Use the function you found in the previous exercise to find the total
area burned after 5 minutes.

A(5)=π ( 2(5)+1 ) 2 =121π square units

The radius r, in inches, of a spherical balloon is related to the
volume, V, by r(V)= 3V 4π 3 . Air is pumped into the balloon, so the
volume after t seconds is given by V(t)=10+20t.

ⓐ

Find the composite function

r

(

V

(

t

)

)

.

ⓑ

Find the

exact

time when the radius reaches 10 inches.

The number of bacteria in a refrigerated food product is given by
N(T)=23 T 2 −56T+1, 3\<T\<33, where T is the temperature of the food.
When the food is removed from the refrigerator, the temperature is given
by T(t)=5t+1.5, where t is the time in hours.

ⓐ

Find the composite function

N

(

T

(

t

)

)

.

ⓑ

Find the time (round to two decimal places) when the bacteria count
reaches 6752.

ⓐ N(T(t))=23 (5t+1.5) 2 −56(5t+1.5)+1 ⓑ 3.38 hours

# 

composite function

the new function formed by function composition, when the output of one
function is used as the input of another
