m51266

> In this section, you will:
>
> Graph functions using vertical and horizontal shifts.
>
> Graph functions using reflections about the x-axis and the y-axis.
>
> Determine whether a function is even, odd, or neither from its graph.
>
> Graph functions using compressions and stretches.
>
> Combine transformations.

5f6ff02a-1000-410d-b034-af26fbd86d0b

#  {#fs-idm347637920}

## Learning Objectives {#fs-idm376363632}

Identify graphs of basic functions, (IA 3.6.2)

Graph quadratic functions using transformations, (IA 9.7.4)

## Objective 1: Identify graphs of basic functions, (IA 3.6.2) {#fs-idm392560496}

Basic functions have unique shapes, characteristics, and algebraic
equations. It will be helpful to recognize and identify these basic or
"toolkit functions" in our work in algebra, precalculus and calculus.
Remember functions can be represented in many ways including by name,
equation, graph, and basic tables of values.

### Practice Makes Perfect {#fs-idm335858048}

Use a graphing program to help complete the following. Then, choose
three values of x to evaluate for each. Add the x and y to the table for
each exercise.

  Name       Equation                           Graph
  ---------- ---------------------------------- -------
  Constant   *y*=*c*, where *c* is a constant   

Choose 3 values of x to evaluate for each.

  ----- -----
  *x*   *y*
        
        
        
  ----- -----

  Name       Equation   Graph
  ---------- ---------- -------
  Identity   *y*=*x*    

Choose 3 values of x to evaluate for each.

  ----- -----
  *x*   *y*
        
        
        
  ----- -----

  Name             Equation      Graph
  ---------------- ------------- -------
  Absolute Value   *y*=\|*x*\|   

Choose 3 values of x to evaluate for each.

  ----- -----
  *x*   *y*
        
        
        
  ----- -----

  Name        Equation   Graph
  ----------- ---------- -------
  Quadratic   *y*=*x*2   

Choose 3 values of x to evaluate for each.

  ----- -----
  *x*   *y*
        
        
        
  ----- -----

  Name    Equation   Graph
  ------- ---------- -------
  Cubic   *y*=*x*3   

Choose 3 values of x to evaluate for each.

  ----- -----
  *x*   *y*
        
        
        
  ----- -----

  Name         Equation   Graph
  ------------ ---------- -------
  Reciprocal   y=1x       

Choose 3 values of x to evaluate for each.

  ----- -----
  *x*   *y*
        
        
        
  ----- -----

  Name          Equation   Graph
  ------------- ---------- -------
  Square Root   y=x        

Choose 3 values of x to evaluate for each.

  ----- -----
  *x*   *y*
        
        
        
  ----- -----

  Name        Equation   Graph
  ----------- ---------- -------
  Cube Root   y=x3       

Choose 3 values of x to evaluate for each.

  ----- -----
  *x*   *y*
        
        
        
  ----- -----

  Name          Equation   Graph
  ------------- ---------- -------
  Exponential   y=ex       

Choose 3 values of x to evaluate for each.

  ----- -----
  *x*   *y*
        
        
        
  ----- -----

## Objective 2: Graph quadratic functions using transformations (IA 9.7.4) {#eip-856}

When we modify basic functions by adding, subtracting, or multiplying
constants to the equation, very systematic changes take place. We call
these transformations of basic functions. Here we will investigate the
effects of vertical shifts, horizontal shifts, vertical stretches or
compressions, and reflections on quadratic functions. We could use any
basic function to illustrate transformations, but quadratics work nicely
because we can easily keep track of a point called the vertex.

### Practice Makes Perfect {#eip-idm347363168}

The graphs of quadratic functions are called parabolas. Use a graphing
program to graph each of the following quadratic functions. For each
graph find the vertex (the minimum or maximum value) of the parabola and
list its coordinates. Most importantly use the patterns observed to
answer each of the given questions.

In general, what effect does adding or subtracting a constant have on
the graph of f(x)=x2 ?

  ---------------------------------- ------------------------------------ -------------------------------------
  f(x)=x2 vertex: \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_   f(x)=x2+2 vertex: \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_   f(x)=x2--4 vertex: \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
  ---------------------------------- ------------------------------------ -------------------------------------

In general, what effect does adding or subtracting a value to x before
it is squared have on the graph of f(x)=x2 ?

  -------------------------------------- -------------------------------------- --------------------------------------
  f(x)=(x-2)2 vertex: \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_   f(x)=(x-4)2 vertex: \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_   f(x)=(x+3)2 vertex: \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
  -------------------------------------- -------------------------------------- --------------------------------------

In general, what effect does multiplying by a constant have on the graph
of f(x)=x2 ?

  ----------------------------------- ----------------------------------- -------------------------------------
  f(x)=2x2 vertex: \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_   f(x)=5x2 vertex: \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_   f(x)=110x2 vertex: \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
  ----------------------------------- ----------------------------------- -------------------------------------

In general, what effect does multiplying by a negative constant have on
the graph of f(x)=x2 ?

  ------------------------------------ ------------------------------------- ------------------------------------
  f(x)=--x2 vertex: \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_   f(x)=--3x2 vertex: \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_   y=(x--2)2 vertex: \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
  ------------------------------------ ------------------------------------- ------------------------------------

  ---------------------------------------- ----------------------------------------- ----------------------------------------- ------------------------------------------
  f(x)=(x+3)2+2 vertex: \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_   f(x)=(x+3)2--2 vertex: \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_   f(x)=(x--3)2+2 vertex: \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_   f(x)=(x--3)2--2 vertex: \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
  ---------------------------------------- ----------------------------------------- ----------------------------------------- ------------------------------------------

Answer each of the following based on the changes you saw in the graphs
above.

ⓐ Based on your observations from the previous graphs, what are the
coordinates of the vertex of the parabola f(x)=(x+200)2-67 ? Do not
attempt to graph!

ⓑ Based on your observations from the previous graphs, what are the
coordinates of the vertex of the parabola f(x)=12(x+6)2+111 ? Do not
attempt to graph!

Fill in the blanks:

ⓐ If *c* \> 0, the graph of y=f(x)+c is obtained by shifting the graph
of y=f(x) to the \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ a distance of *c* units. The graph of
y=f(x)--c is obtained by shifting the graph of y=f(x) to the
\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ a distance of *c* units.

ⓑ If *c* \> 0, the graph of y=f(x)--c is obtained by shifting the graph
of y=f(x) to the \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ a distance of *c* units. The graph of
y=f(x)+c is obtained by shifting the graph of y=f(x) to the
\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ a distance of *c* units.

Apply what you have learned in this skill sheet regarding
transformations. Write the equation of a quadratic function that has
been transformed in the each of the ways described in parts ⓐ and ⓑ
below. Write equations in *f*(*x*) = form. After writing an equation
check your answer using a graphing program and graph below. Be sure to
label the vertex as an ordered pair. Does your graph match the
description?

ⓐ Flipped upside down and shifted to the right 3 units and down 2 units.
*f*(*x*) =

ⓑ Stretched vertically by a factor of 4 and shifted left 6 units and up
5 units. *f*(*x*) =

Remember the basic transformations investigated in this activity apply
to all basic functions. Apply what you have learned in this lab about
transformations. Write the equation of a function that has been
transformed in the following ways. Write equations in *f*(*x*) = form.
After writing an equation check your answer using a graphing program and
graph below. Be sure to label a point on the graph. Does your graph
match the description?

ⓐ Begin with a basic square root function. Reflect the graph over the
x-axis and shift it to the right 2 units and down 1 unit. *f*(*x*) =

ⓑ Begin with an absolute value function. Stretch the graph vertically by
a factor of 3 and shift it left 4 units and up 5 units. *f*(*x*) =

<figure id="Figure_01_05_001">

</figure>

We all know that a flat mirror enables us to see an accurate image of
ourselves and whatever is behind us. When we tilt the mirror, the images
we see may shift horizontally or vertically. But what happens when we
bend a flexible mirror? Like a carnival funhouse mirror, it presents us
with a distorted image of ourselves, stretched or compressed
horizontally or vertically. In a similar way, we can distort or
transform mathematical functions to better adapt them to describing
objects or processes in the real world. In this section, we will take a
look at several kinds of transformations.

# Graphing Functions Using Vertical and Horizontal Shifts {#fs-id1165137827988}

Often when given a problem, we try to model the scenario using
mathematics in the form of words, tables, graphs, and equations. One
method we can employ is to adapt the basic graphs of the toolkit
functions to build new models for a given scenario. There are systematic
ways to alter functions to construct appropriate models for the problems
we are trying to solve.

## Identifying Vertical Shifts {#fs-id1165137535664}

One simple kind of transformation involves shifting the entire graph of
a function up, down, right, or left. The simplest shift is a *vertical
shift*, moving the graph up or down, because this transformation
involves adding a positive or negative constant to the function. In
other words, we add the same constant to the output value of the
function regardless of the input. For a function g(x)=f(x)+k, the
function f( x ) is shifted vertically k units. See [\#](#) for an
example.

<figure id="Figure_01_05_002">

</figure>

To help you visualize the concept of a vertical shift, consider that
y=f( x ). Therefore, f( x )+k is equivalent to y+k. Every unit of y is
replaced by y+k, so the *y*-value increases or decreases depending on
the value of k. The result is a shift upward or downward.

:::: {#fs-id1165137737394 .note}
::: title
Vertical Shift
:::

Given a function f( x ), a new function g(x)=f(x)+k, where k is a
constant, is a vertical shift of the function f( x ). All the output
values change by k units. If k is positive, the graph will shift up. If
k is negative, the graph will shift down.
::::

::: {#Example_01_05_01 .example}
To regulate temperature in a green building, airflow vents near the roof
open and close throughout the day. [\#](#) shows the area of open vents
V (in square feet) throughout the day in hours after midnight, t. During
the summer, the facilities manager decides to try to better regulate
temperature by increasing the amount of open vents by 20 square feet
throughout the day and night. Sketch a graph of this new function.

<figure id="Figure_01_05_003">

</figure>

We can sketch a graph of this new function by adding 20 to each of the
output values of the original function. This will have the effect of
shifting the graph vertically up, as shown in [\#](#).

<figure id="Figure_01_05_004">

</figure>

Notice that in [\#](#), for each input value, the output value has
increased by 20, so if we call the new function S( t ), we could write

$$S(t) = V(t) + 20$$

This notation tells us that, for any value of t,S(t) can be found by
evaluating the function V at the same input and then adding 20 to the
result. This defines S as a transformation of the function V, in this
case a vertical shift up 20 units. Notice that, with a vertical shift,
the input values stay the same and only the output values change. See
[\#](#).

  ------------ ---- ---- ----- ----- ---- ----
  *t*           0    8    10    17    19   24
  *V(t)*        0    0    220   220   0    0
  *S( t )*      20   20   240   240   20   20
  ------------ ---- ---- ----- ----- ---- ----
:::

:::: {#fs-id1165135369225 .note}
::: title
:::

How To

*Given a tabular function, create a new row to represent a vertical
shift.*

Identify the output row or column.

Determine the

magnitude

of the shift.

Add the shift to the value in each output cell. Add a positive value for
up or a negative value for down.
::::

::: {#Example_01_05_02 .example}
A function f( x ) is given in [\#](#). Create a table for the function
g(x)=f(x)−3.

  ---------- --- --- --- ----
  *x*        2   4   6   8
  *f(x)*     1   3   7   11
  ---------- --- --- --- ----

The formula g(x)=f(x)−3 tells us that we can find the output values of g
by subtracting 3 from the output values of f. For example:

$$\begin{array}{cclc}
{f(2)} & = & 1 & \text{Given} \\
{g(x)} & = & {f(x) - 3} & \text{Given~transformation} \\
{g(2)} & = & {f(2) - 3} & \\
 & = & {1 - 3} & \\
 & = & {- 2} & 
\end{array}$$

Subtracting 3 from each f( x ) value, we can complete a table of values
for g( x ) as shown in [\#](#).

  -------------- -------------- -------------- -------------- --------------
  *x*            2              4              6              8

  *f(x)*         1              3              7              11

  *g(x)*         −2             0              4              8
  -------------- -------------- -------------- -------------- --------------

As with the earlier vertical shift, notice the input values stay the
same and only the output values change.
:::

:::: {#fs-id1165137692134 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

The function h(t)=−4.9 t 2 +30t gives the height h of a ball (in meters)
thrown upward from the ground after t seconds. Suppose the ball was
instead thrown from the top of a 10-m building. Relate this new height
function b(t) to h(t), and then find a formula for b(t).

$$b(t) = h(t) + 10 = - 4.9t^{2} + 30t + 10$$
::::

## Identifying Horizontal Shifts {#fs-id1165137597159}

We just saw that the vertical shift is a change to the output, or
outside, of the function. We will now look at how changes to input, on
the inside of the function, change its graph and meaning. A shift to the
input results in a movement of the graph of the function left or right
in what is known as a *horizontal shift*, shown in [\#](#).

<figure id="Figure_01_05_005">

</figure>

For example, if f(x)= x 2 , then g(x)= (x−2) 2 is a new function. Each
input is reduced by 2 prior to squaring the function. The result is that
the graph is shifted 2 units to the right, because we would need to
increase the prior input by 2 units to yield the same output value as
given in f.

:::: {#fs-id1165137436470 .note}
::: title
Horizontal Shift
:::

Given a function f, a new function g( x )=f( x−h ), where h is a
constant, is a horizontal shift of the function f. If h is positive, the
graph will shift right. If h is negative, the graph will shift left.
::::

::: {#Example_01_05_03 .example}
Returning to our building airflow example from [\#](#), suppose that in
autumn the facilities manager decides that the original venting plan
starts too late, and wants to begin the entire venting program 2 hours
earlier. Sketch a graph of the new function.

We can set V( t ) to be the original program and F( t ) to be the
revised program.

$$\begin{array}{rcl}
{V(t)} & = & \text{the~original~venting~plan} \\
{F(t)} & = & \text{starting~2~hrs~sooner}
\end{array}$$

In the new graph, at each time, the airflow is the same as the original
function V was 2 hours later. For example, in the original function V,
the airflow starts to change at 8 a.m., whereas for the function F, the
airflow starts to change at 6 a.m. The comparable function values are
V(8)=F(6). See [\#](#). Notice also that the vents first opened to 220
ft 2 at 10 a.m. under the original plan, while under the new plan the
vents reach 220 ft 2 at 8 a.m., so V(10)=F(8).

In both cases, we see that, because F( t ) starts 2 hours sooner, h=−2.
That means that the same output values are reached when F(t)=V(t−( −2
))=V( t+2 ).

<figure id="Figure_01_05_006">

</figure>

Note that V(t+2) has the effect of shifting the graph to the *left*.

Horizontal changes or "inside changes" affect the domain of a function
(the input) instead of the range and often seem counterintuitive. The
new function F( t ) uses the same outputs as V( t ), but matches those
outputs to inputs 2 hours earlier than those of V( t ). Said another
way, we must add 2 hours to the input of V to find the corresponding
output for F:F(t)=V(t+2).
:::

:::: {#fs-id1165137644724 .note}
::: title
:::

How To

*Given a tabular function, create a new row to represent a horizontal
shift.*

Identify the input row or column.

Determine the magnitude of the shift.

Add the shift to the value in each input cell.
::::

::: {#Example_01_05_04 .example}
A function f(x) is given in [\#](#). Create a table for the function
g(x)=f(x−3).

  -------------- -------------- -------------- -------------- --------------
  *x*            2              4              6              8

  *f(x)*         1              3              7              11
  -------------- -------------- -------------- -------------- --------------

The formula g(x)=f(x−3) tells us that the output values of g are the
same as the output value of f when the input value is 3 less than the
original value. For example, we know that f(2)=1. To get the same output
from the function g, we will need an input value that is 3 *larger*. We
input a value that is 3 larger for g(x) because the function takes 3
away before evaluating the function f.

$$\begin{array}{ccl}
{g(5)} & = & {f(5 - 3)} \\
 & = & {f(2)} \\
 & = & 1
\end{array}$$

We continue with the other values to create [\#](#).

  ------------- --- --- --- ----
  *x*           5   7   9   11
  *x−3*         2   4   6   8
  *f(x--3)*     1   3   7   11
  *g(x)*        1   3   7   11
  ------------- --- --- --- ----

The result is that the function g(x) has been shifted to the right by 3.
Notice the output values for g(x) remain the same as the output values
for f(x), but the corresponding input values, x, have shifted to the
right by 3. Specifically, 2 shifted to 5, 4 shifted to 7, 6 shifted to
9, and 8 shifted to 11.

[\#](#) represents both of the functions. We can see the horizontal
shift in each point.

<figure id="Figure_01_05_007">

</figure>
:::

::: {#Example_01_05_05 .example}
[\#](#) represents a transformation of the toolkit function f(x)= x 2 .
Relate this new function g(x) to f(x), and then find a formula for g(x).

<figure id="Figure_01_05_008">

</figure>

Notice that the graph is identical in shape to the f(x)= x 2 function,
but the *x-*values are shifted to the right 2 units. The vertex used to
be at (0,0), but now the vertex is at (2,0). The graph is the basic
quadratic function shifted 2 units to the right, so

$$g(x) = f(x - 2)$$

Notice how we must input the value x=2 to get the output value y=0; the
*x*-values must be 2 units larger because of the shift to the right by 2
units. We can then use the definition of the f(x) function to write a
formula for g(x) by evaluating f(x−2).

$$\begin{array}{rcl}
{f(x)} & = & x^{2} \\
{g(x)} & = & {f(x - 2)} \\
{g(x)} & = & {f(x - 2) = {(x - 2)}^{2}}
\end{array}$$

To determine whether the shift is +2 or −2 , consider a single reference
point on the graph. For a quadratic, looking at the vertex point is
convenient. In the original function, f(0)=0. In our shifted function,
g(2)=0. To obtain the output value of 0 from the function f, we need to
decide whether a plus or a minus sign will work to satisfy
g(2)=f(x−2)=f(0)=0. For this to work, we will need to *subtract* 2 units
from our input values.
:::

::: {#Example_01_05_06 .example}
The function G(m) gives the number of gallons of gas required to drive m
miles. Interpret G(m)+10 and G(m+10).

G(m)+10 can be interpreted as adding 10 to the output, gallons. This is
the gas required to drive m miles, plus another 10 gallons of gas. The
graph would indicate a vertical shift.

G(m+10) can be interpreted as adding 10 to the input, miles. So this is
the number of gallons of gas required to drive 10 miles more than m
miles. The graph would indicate a horizontal shift.
:::

:::: {#fs-id1165137781562 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Given the function f(x)= x , graph the original function f(x) and the
transformation g(x)=f(x+2) on the same axes. Is this a horizontal or a
vertical shift? Which way is the graph shifted and by how many units?

The graphs of f(x) and g(x) are shown below. The transformation is a
horizontal shift. The function is shifted to the left by 2 units.
::::

## Combining Vertical and Horizontal Shifts {#fs-id1165135250592}

Now that we have two transformations, we can combine them. Vertical
shifts are outside changes that affect the output (*y*-) values and
shift the function up or down. Horizontal shifts are inside changes that
affect the input (*x*-) values and shift the function left or right.
Combining the two types of shifts will cause the graph of a function to
shift up or down *and* left or right.

:::: {#fs-id1165137628099 .note}
::: title
:::

How To

*Given a function and both a vertical and a horizontal shift, sketch the
graph.*

Identify the vertical and horizontal shifts from the formula.

The vertical shift results from a constant added to the output. Move the
graph up for a positive constant and down for a negative constant.

The horizontal shift results from a constant added to the input. Move
the graph left for a positive constant and right for a negative
constant.

Apply the shifts to the graph in either order.
::::

::: {#Example_01_05_07 .example}
Given f(x)=\| x \|, sketch a graph of h(x)=f(x+1)−3.

The function f is our toolkit absolute value function. We know that this
graph has a V shape, with the point at the origin. The graph of h has
transformed f in two ways: f(x+1) is a change on the inside of the
function, giving a horizontal shift left by 1, and the subtraction by 3
in f(x+1)−3 is a change to the outside of the function, giving a
vertical shift down by 3. The transformation of the graph is illustrated
in [\#](#).

Let us follow one point of the graph of f(x)=\| x \|.

The point

(

0

,

0

)

is transformed first by shifting left 1 unit:

(

0

,

0

)

→

(

−1

,

0

)

The point

(

−1

,

0

)

is transformed next by shifting down 3 units:

(

−1

,

0

)

→

(

−1

,

−3

)

<figure id="Figure_01_05_010a">

</figure>

[\#](#) shows the graph of h.

<figure id="Figure_01_05_010b">

</figure>
:::

:::: {#fs-id1165135192765 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Given f(x)=\| x \|, sketch a graph of h(x)=f(x−2)+4.
::::

::: {#Example_01_05_08 .example}
Write a formula for the graph shown in [\#](#), which is a
transformation of the toolkit square root function.

<figure id="Figure_01_05_012">

</figure>

The graph of the toolkit function starts at the origin, so this graph
has been shifted 1 to the right and up 2. In function notation, we could
write that as

$$h(x) = f(x - 1) + 2$$

Using the formula for the square root function, we can write

$$h(x) = \sqrt{x - 1} + 2$$

Note that this transformation has changed the domain and range of the
function. This new graph has domain \[1,∞) and range \[2,∞).
:::

:::: {#fs-id1165135401680 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Write a formula for a transformation of the toolkit reciprocal function
f( x )= 1 x that shifts the function's graph one unit to the right and
one unit up.

g( x )= 1 x-1 +1
::::

# Graphing Functions Using Reflections about the Axes {#fs-id1165137600415}

Another transformation that can be applied to a function is a reflection
over the *x*- or *y*-axis. A *vertical reflection* reflects a graph
vertically across the *x*-axis, while a *horizontal reflection* reflects
a graph horizontally across the *y*-axis. The reflections are shown in
[\#](#).

<figure id="Figure_01_05_013">

</figure>

Notice that the vertical reflection produces a new graph that is a
mirror image of the base or original graph about the *x*-axis. The
horizontal reflection produces a new graph that is a mirror image of the
base or original graph about the *y*-axis.

:::: {#fs-id1165137432318 .note}
::: title
Reflections
:::

Given a function f(x), a new function g(x)=−f(x) is a vertical
reflection of the function f(x), sometimes called a reflection about (or
over, or through) the *x*-axis.

Given a function f(x), a new function g(x)=f(−x) is a horizontal
reflection of the function f(x), sometimes called a reflection about the
*y*-axis.
::::

:::: {#fs-id1165137557940 .note}
::: title
:::

How To

*Given a function, reflect the graph both vertically and horizontally.*

Multiply all outputs by --1 for a vertical reflection. The new graph is
a reflection of the original graph about the

x

-axis.

Multiply all inputs by --1 for a horizontal reflection. The new graph is
a reflection of the original graph about the

y

-axis.
::::

::: {#Example_01_05_09 .example}
Reflect the graph of s(t)= t (a) vertically and (b) horizontally.

ⓐ

Reflecting the graph vertically means that each output value will be
reflected over the horizontal *t-*axis as shown in [\#](#).

<figure id="Figure_01_05_014">

</figure>

Because each output value is the opposite of the original output value,
we can write

$$V(t) = - s(t)\mspace{9mu}\text{or~}V(t) = - \sqrt{t}$$

Notice that this is an outside change, or vertical shift, that affects
the output s(t) values, so the negative sign belongs outside of the
function.

ⓑ

Reflecting horizontally means that each input value will be reflected
over the vertical axis as shown in [\#](#).

<figure id="Figure_01_05_015">

</figure>

Because each input value is the opposite of the original input value, we
can write

$$H(t) = s( - t)\mspace{9mu}\text{or~}H(t) = \sqrt{- t}$$

Notice that this is an inside change or horizontal change that affects
the input values, so the negative sign is on the inside of the function.

Note that these transformations can affect the domain and range of the
functions. While the original square root function has domain \[0,∞) and
range \[0,∞), the vertical reflection gives the V(t) function the range
( −∞,0 \] and the horizontal reflection gives the H(t) function the
domain ( −∞,0 \].
:::

:::: {#fs-id1165135330596 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Reflect the graph of f(x)=\|x−1\| (a) vertically and (b) horizontally.

ⓐ

ⓑ
::::

::: {#Example_01_05_10 .example}
A function f(x) is given as [\#](#). Create a table for the functions
below.

ⓐ

g

(

x

)

=

−

f

(

x

)

ⓑ

h

(

x

)

=

f

(

−

x

)

  ---------- --- --- --- ----
  *x*        2   4   6   8
  *f(x)*     1   3   7   11
  ---------- --- --- --- ----

ⓐ

For g(x), the negative sign outside the function indicates a vertical
reflection, so the *x*-values stay the same and each output value will
be the opposite of the original output value. See [\#](#).

  ---------- ----- ----- ----- ------
  *x*        2     4     6     8
  *g(x)*     --1   --3   --7   --11
  ---------- ----- ----- ----- ------

ⓑ

For h(x), the negative sign inside the function indicates a horizontal
reflection, so each input value will be the opposite of the original
input value and the h(x) values stay the same as the f(x) values. See
[\#](#).

  ---------- ---- ---- ---- ----
  *x*        −2   −4   −6   −8
  *h(x)*     1    3    7    11
  ---------- ---- ---- ---- ----
:::

:::: {#fs-id1165132937220 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

A function f(x) is given as [\#](#). Create a table for the functions
below.

ⓐ

g

(

x

)

=

−

f

(

x

)

ⓑ

h

(

x

)

=

f

(

−

x

)

  ---------- ---- ---- ---- ----
  *x*        −2   0    2    4
  *f(x)*     5    10   15   20
  ---------- ---- ---- ---- ----

ⓐ

g(x)=−f(x)

  ------ ---- ----- ----- -----
  x      -2   0     2     4
  g(x)   −5   −10   −15   −20
  ------ ---- ----- ----- -----

ⓑ

h(x)=f(−x)

  ------ ---- ---- --- ---------
  x      -2   0    2   4
  h(x)   15   10   5   unknown
  ------ ---- ---- --- ---------
::::

::: {#Example_01_05_11 .example}
A common model for learning has an equation similar to k(t)=− 2 −t +1,
where k is the percentage of mastery that can be achieved after t
practice sessions. This is a transformation of the function f(t)= 2 t
shown in [\#](#). Sketch a graph of k(t).

<figure id="Figure_01_05_017">

</figure>

This equation combines three transformations into one equation.

A horizontal reflection:

f

(

−

t

)

=

2

−

t

A vertical reflection:

−

f

(

−

t

)

=

−

2

−

t

A vertical shift:

−

f

(

−

t

)

\+

1

=

−

2

−

t

\+

1

We can sketch a graph by applying these transformations one at a time to
the original function. Let us follow two points through each of the
three transformations. We will choose the points (0, 1) and (1, 2).

First, we apply a horizontal reflection: (0, 1) (--1, 2).

Then, we apply a vertical reflection: (0, -1) (-1, --2)

Finally, we apply a vertical shift: (0, 0) (-1, -1)).

This means that the original points, (0,1) and (1,2) become (0,0) and
(-1,-1) after we apply the transformations.

In [\#](#), the first graph results from a horizontal reflection. The
second results from a vertical reflection. The third results from a
vertical shift up 1 unit.

<figure id="Figure_01_05_018">

</figure>

As a model for learning, this function would be limited to a domain of
t≥0, with corresponding range \[0,1).
:::

:::: {#fs-id1165137472858 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Given the toolkit function f(x)= x 2 , graph g(x)=−f(x) and h(x)=f(−x).
Take note of any surprising behavior for these functions.

Notice: g(x)=f(−x) looks the same as f(x) .
::::

# Determining Even and Odd Functions {#fs-id1165135182974}

Some functions exhibit symmetry so that reflections result in the
original graph. For example, horizontally reflecting the toolkit
functions f(x)= x 2 or f(x)=\| x \| will result in the original graph.
We say that these types of graphs are symmetric about the *y*-axis. A
function whose graph is symmetric about the *y*-axis is called an *even
function.*

If the graphs of f(x)= x 3 or f(x)= 1 x were reflected over *both* axes,
the result would be the original graph, as shown in [\#](#).

<figure id="Figure_01_05_022">

</figure>

We say that these graphs are symmetric about the origin. A function with
a graph that is symmetric about the origin is called an *odd function*.

Note: A function can be neither even nor odd if it does not exhibit
either symmetry. For example, f(x)= 2 x is neither even nor odd. Also,
the only function that is both even and odd is the constant function
f(x)=0.

:::: {#fs-id1165137619398 .note}
::: title
Even and Odd Functions
:::

A function is called an even function if for every input x

$$f(x) = f( - x)$$

The graph of an even function is symmetric about the y- axis.

A function is called an odd function if for every input x

$$f(x) = - f( - x)$$

The graph of an odd function is symmetric about the origin.
::::

:::: {#fs-id1165135503849 .note}
::: title
:::

How To

*Given the formula for a function, determine if the function is even,
odd, or neither.*

Determine whether the function satisfies

f

(

x

)

=

f

(

−

x

)

.

If it does, it is even.

Determine whether the function satisfies

f

(

x

)

=

−

f

(

−

x

)

.

If it does, it is odd.

If the function does not satisfy either rule, it is neither even nor
odd.
::::

::: {#Example_01_05_12 .example}
Is the function f(x)= x 3 +2x even, odd, or neither?

Without looking at a graph, we can determine whether the function is
even or odd by finding formulas for the reflections and determining if
they return us to the original function. Let's begin with the rule for
even functions.

$$f( - x) = {( - x)}^{3} + 2( - x) = - x^{3} - 2x$$

This does not return us to the original function, so this function is
not even. We can now test the rule for odd functions.

$$- f( - x) = - \left( {- x^{3} - 2x} \right) = x^{3} + 2x$$

Because −f(−x)=f(x), this is an odd function.

Consider the graph of f in [\#](#). Notice that the graph is symmetric
about the origin. For every point ( x,y ) on the graph, the
corresponding point ( −x,−y ) is also on the graph. For example, (1, 3)
is on the graph of f, and the corresponding point (−1,−3) is also on the
graph.

<figure id="Figure_01_05_039">

</figure>
:::

:::: {#fs-id1165135400987 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Is the function f(s)= s 4 +3 s 2 +7 even, odd, or neither?

even
::::

# Graphing Functions Using Stretches and Compressions {#fs-id1165137654768}

Adding a constant to the inputs or outputs of a function changed the
position of a graph with respect to the axes, but it did not affect the
shape of a graph. We now explore the effects of multiplying the inputs
or outputs by some quantity.

We can transform the inside (input values) of a function or we can
transform the outside (output values) of a function. Each change has a
specific effect that can be seen graphically.

## Vertical Stretches and Compressions {#fs-id1165137793506}

When we multiply a function by a positive constant, we get a function
whose graph is stretched or compressed vertically in relation to the
graph of the original function. If the constant is greater than 1, we
get a *vertical stretch*; if the constant is between 0 and 1, we get a
*vertical compression*. [\#](#) shows a function multiplied by constant
factors 2 and 0.5 and the resulting vertical stretch and compression.

<figure id="Figure_01_05_025">

</figure>

:::: {#fs-id1165137472530 .note}
::: title
Vertical Stretches and Compressions
:::

Given a function f(x), a new function g(x)=af(x), where a is a constant,
is a vertical stretch or vertical compression of the function f(x).

If

a

\>

1

,

then the graph will be stretched.

If

0

\<

a

\<

1

,

then the graph will be compressed.

If

a

\<

0

,

then there will be combination of a vertical stretch or compression with
a vertical reflection.
::::

:::: {#fs-id1165135173107 .note}
::: title
:::

How To

*Given a function, graph its vertical stretch.*

Identify the value of

a

.

Multiply all range values by

a

.

If a\>1, the graph is stretched by a factor of a.

If 0\<a\<1, the graph is compressed by a factor of a.

If a\<0, the graph is either stretched or compressed and also reflected
about the *x*-axis.
::::

::: {#Example_01_05_13 .example}
A function P( t ) models the population of fruit flies. The graph is
shown in [\#](#).

<figure id="Figure_01_05_026">

</figure>

A scientist is comparing this population to another population, Q, whose
growth follows the same pattern, but is twice as large. Sketch a graph
of this population.

Because the population is always twice as large, the new population's
output values are always twice the original function's output values.
Graphically, this is shown in [\#](#).

If we choose four reference points, (0, 1), (3, 3), (6, 2) and (7, 0) we
will multiply all of the outputs by 2.

The following shows where the new points for the new graph will be
located.

$$\begin{array}{l}
{\left( {0,\mspace{9mu} 1} \right)\rightarrow\left( {0,\mspace{9mu} 2} \right)} \\
{\left( {3,\mspace{9mu} 3} \right)\rightarrow\left( {3,\mspace{9mu} 6} \right)} \\
{\left( {6,\mspace{9mu} 2} \right)\rightarrow\left( {6,\mspace{9mu} 4} \right)} \\
{\left( {7,\mspace{9mu} 0} \right)\rightarrow\left( {7,\mspace{9mu} 0} \right)}
\end{array}$$

<figure id="Figure_01_05_027">

</figure>

Symbolically, the relationship is written as

$$Q(t) = 2P(t)$$

This means that for any input t, the value of the function Q is twice
the value of the function P. Notice that the effect on the graph is a
vertical stretching of the graph, where every point doubles its distance
from the horizontal axis. The input values, t, stay the same while the
output values are twice as large as before.
:::

:::: {#fs-id1165137647092 .note}
::: title
:::

How To

*Given a tabular function and assuming that the transformation is a
vertical stretch or compression, create a table for a vertical
compression.*

Determine the value of

a

.

Multiply all of the output values by

a

.
::::

::: {#Example_01_05_14 .example}
A function f is given as [\#](#). Create a table for the function g(x)=
1 2 f(x).

  ---------- --- --- --- ----
  *x*        2   4   6   8
  *f(x)*     1   3   7   11
  ---------- --- --- --- ----

The formula g(x)= 1 2 f(x) tells us that the output values of g are half
of the output values of f with the same inputs. For example, we know
that f(4)=3. Then

$$g(4) = \frac{1}{2}f(4) = \frac{1}{2}(3) = \frac{3}{2}$$

We do the same for the other values to produce [\#](#).

  ---------- ----- ----- ----- ------
  *x*        2     4     6     8
  *g(x)*     1 2   3 2   7 2   11 2
  ---------- ----- ----- ----- ------

The result is that the function g(x) has been compressed vertically by 1
2 . Each output value is divided in half, so the graph is half the
original height.
:::

:::: {#fs-id1165137755750 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

A function f is given as [\#](#). Create a table for the function g(x)=
3 4 f(x).

  ------ ---- ---- ---- ---
  x      2    4    6    8
  f(x)   12   16   20   0
  ------ ---- ---- ---- ---

  ------ --- ---- ---- ---
  x      2   4    6    8
  g(x)   9   12   15   0
  ------ --- ---- ---- ---
::::

::: {#Example_01_05_15 .example}
The graph in [\#](#) is a transformation of the toolkit function f(x)= x
3 . Relate this new function g(x) to f(x), and then find a formula for
g(x).

<figure id="Figure_01_05_028">

</figure>

When trying to determine a vertical stretch or shift, it is helpful to
look for a point on the graph that is relatively clear. In this graph,
it appears that g(2)=2. With the basic cubic function at the same input,
f(2)= 2 3 =8. Based on that, it appears that the outputs of g are 1 4
the outputs of the function f because g(2)= 1 4 f(2). From this we can
fairly safely conclude that g(x)= 1 4 f(x).

We can write a formula for g by using the definition of the function f.

$$g(x) = \frac{1}{4}f(x) = \frac{1}{4}x^{3}$$
:::

:::: {#fs-id1165135499881 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Write the formula for the function that we get when we stretch the
identity toolkit function by a factor of 3, and then shift it down by 2
units.

g(x)=3x-2
::::

## Horizontal Stretches and Compressions {#fs-id1165135344103}

Now we consider changes to the inside of a function. When we multiply a
function's input by a positive constant, we get a function whose graph
is stretched or compressed horizontally in relation to the graph of the
original function. If the constant is between 0 and 1, we get a
*horizontal stretch*; if the constant is greater than 1, we get a
*horizontal compression* of the function.

<figure id="Figure_01_05_029">

</figure>

Given a function y=f(x), the form y=f(bx) results in a horizontal
stretch or compression. Consider the function y= x 2 . Observe [\#](#).
The graph of y= ( 0.5x ) 2 is a horizontal stretch of the graph of the
function y= x 2 by a factor of 2. The graph of y= ( 2x ) 2 is a
horizontal compression of the graph of the function y= x 2 by a factor
of 2.

:::: {#fs-id1165137732896 .note}
::: title
Horizontal Stretches and Compressions
:::

Given a function f(x), a new function g(x)=f(bx), where b is a constant,
is a horizontal stretch or horizontal compression of the function f(x).

If

b

\>

1

,

then the graph will be compressed by

1

b

.

If

0

\<

b

\<

1

,

then the graph will be stretched by

1

b

.

If

b

\<

0

,

then there will be combination of a horizontal stretch or compression
with a horizontal reflection.
::::

:::: {#fs-id1165137832347 .note}
::: title
:::

How To

*Given a description of a function, sketch a horizontal compression or
stretch.*

Write a formula to represent the function.

Set

g

(

x

)

=

f

(

b

x

)

where

b

\>

1

for a compression or

0

\<

b

\<

1

for a stretch.
::::

::: {#Example_01_05_16 .example}
Suppose a scientist is comparing a population of fruit flies to a
population that progresses through its lifespan twice as fast as the
original population. In other words, this new population, R, will
progress in 1 hour the same amount as the original population does in 2
hours, and in 2 hours, it will progress as much as the original
population does in 4 hours. Sketch a graph of this population.

Symbolically, we could write

$$\begin{array}{rcl}
{R(1)} & = & {P(2),} \\
{R(2)} & = & {P(4),\mspace{9mu}\text{and~in~general,}} \\
{R(t)} & = & {P(2t).}
\end{array}$$

See [\#](#) for a graphical comparison of the original population and
the compressed population.

<figure id="Figure_01_05_030">

</figure>

Note that the effect on the graph is a horizontal compression where all
input values are half of their original distance from the vertical axis.
:::

::: {#Example_01_05_17 .example}
A function f(x) is given as [\#](#). Create a table for the function
g(x)=f( 1 2 x ).

  ---------- --- --- --- ----
  *x*        2   4   6   8
  *f(x)*     1   3   7   11
  ---------- --- --- --- ----

The formula g(x)=f( 1 2 x ) tells us that the output values for g are
the same as the output values for the function f at an input half the
size. Notice that we do not have enough information to determine g(2)
because g(2)=f( 1 2 ⋅2 )=f(1), and we do not have a value for f(1) in
our table. Our input values to g will need to be twice as large to get
inputs for f that we can evaluate. For example, we can determine g(4).

$$g(4) = f\left( {\frac{1}{2} \cdot 4} \right) = f(2) = 1$$

We do the same for the other values to produce [\#](#).

  ---------- --- --- ---- ----
  *x*        4   8   12   16
  *g(x)*     1   3   7    11
  ---------- --- --- ---- ----

[\#](#) shows the graphs of both of these sets of points.

<figure id="Figure_01_05_032">

</figure>

Because each input value has been doubled, the result is that the
function g(x) has been stretched horizontally by a factor of 2.
:::

::: {#Example_01_05_18 .example}
Relate the function g(x) to f(x) in [\#](#).

<figure id="Figure_01_05_033">

</figure>

The graph of g(x) looks like the graph of f(x) horizontally compressed.
Because f(x) ends at (6,4) and g(x) ends at (2,4), we can see that the
x- values have been compressed by 1 3 , because 6( 1 3 )=2. We might
also notice that g(2)=f( 6 ) and g(1)=f( 3 ). Either way, we can
describe this relationship as g(x)=f( 3x ). This is a horizontal
compression by 1 3 .

Notice that the coefficient needed for a horizontal stretch or
compression is the reciprocal of the stretch or compression. So to
stretch the graph horizontally by a scale factor of 4, we need a
coefficient of 1 4 in our function: f( 1 4 x ). This means that the
input values must be four times larger to produce the same result,
requiring the input to be larger, causing the horizontal stretching.
:::

:::: {#fs-id1165135613633 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Write a formula for the toolkit square root function horizontally
stretched by a factor of 3.

g(x)=f( 1 3 x ) so using the square root function we get g(x)= 1 3 x
::::

# Performing a Sequence of Transformations {#fs-id1165137676302}

When combining transformations, it is very important to consider the
order of the transformations. For example, vertically shifting by 3 and
then vertically stretching by 2 does not create the same graph as
vertically stretching by 2 and then vertically shifting by 3, because
when we shift first, both the original function and the shift get
stretched, while only the original function gets stretched when we
stretch first.

When we see an expression such as 2f(x)+3, which transformation should
we start with? The answer here follows nicely from the order of
operations. Given the output value of f(x), we first multiply by 2,
causing the vertical stretch, and then add 3, causing the vertical
shift. In other words, multiplication before addition.

Horizontal transformations are a little trickier to think about. When we
write g(x)=f(2x+3), for example, we have to think about how the inputs
to the function g relate to the inputs to the function f. Suppose we
know f(7)=12. What input to g would produce that output? In other words,
what value of x will allow g(x)=f(2x+3)=12? We would need 2x+3=7. To
solve for x, we would first subtract 3, resulting in a horizontal shift,
and then divide by 2, causing a horizontal compression.

This format ends up being very difficult to work with, because it is
usually much easier to horizontally stretch a graph before shifting. We
can work around this by factoring inside the function.

$$f(bx + p) = f\left( {b\left( {x + \frac{p}{b}} \right)} \right)$$

Let's work through an example.

$$f(x) = \left( {2x + 4} \right)^{2}$$

We can factor out a 2.

$$f(x) = \left( {2\left( {x + 2} \right)} \right)^{2}$$

Now we can more clearly observe a horizontal shift to the left 2 units
and a horizontal compression. Factoring in this way allows us to
horizontally stretch first and then shift horizontally.

:::: {#fs-id1165137715290 .note}
::: title
Combining Transformations
:::

When combining vertical transformations written in the form af(x)+k,
first vertically stretch by a and then vertically shift by k.

When combining horizontal transformations written in the form f(bx-h),
first horizontally shift by h and then horizontally stretch by 1 b .

When combining horizontal transformations written in the form f(b(x-h)),
first horizontally stretch by 1 b and then horizontally shift by h.

Horizontal and vertical transformations are independent. It does not
matter whether horizontal or vertical transformations are performed
first.
::::

::: {#Example_01_05_19 .example}
Given [\#](#) for the function f(x), create a table of values for the
function g(x)=2f(3x)+1.

  ---------- ---- ---- ---- ----
  *x*        6    12   18   24
  *f(x)*     10   14   15   17
  ---------- ---- ---- ---- ----

There are three steps to this transformation, and we will work from the
inside out. Starting with the horizontal transformations, f(3x) is a
horizontal compression by 1 3 , which means we multiply each x- value by
1 3 . See [\#](#).

  ----------- ---- ---- ---- ----
  *x*         2    4    6    8
  *f(3x)*     10   14   15   17
  ----------- ---- ---- ---- ----

Looking now to the vertical transformations, we start with the vertical
stretch, which will multiply the output values by 2. We apply this to
the previous transformation. See [\#](#).

  ------------ ---- ---- ---- ----
  *x*          2    4    6    8
  *2f(3x)*     20   28   30   34
  ------------ ---- ---- ---- ----

Finally, we can apply the vertical shift, which will add 1 to all the
output values. See [\#](#).

  ------------------- ---- ---- ---- ----
  *x*                 2    4    6    8
  *g(x)=2f(3x)+1*     21   29   31   35
  ------------------- ---- ---- ---- ----
:::

::: {#Example_01_05_20 .example}
Use the graph of f( x ) in [\#](#) to sketch a graph of k(x)=f( 1 2 x+1
)−3.

<figure id="Figure_01_05_035">

</figure>

To simplify, let's start by factoring out the inside of the function.

$$f\left( {\frac{1}{2}x + 1} \right) - 3 = f\left( {\frac{1}{2}(x + 2)} \right) - 3$$

By factoring the inside, we can first horizontally stretch by 2, as
indicated by the 1 2 on the inside of the function. Remember that twice
the size of 0 is still 0, so the point (0,2) remains at (0,2) while the
point (2,0) will stretch to (4,0). See [\#](#).

<figure id="Figure_01_05_036">

</figure>

Next, we horizontally shift left by 2 units, as indicated by x+2. See
[\#](#).

<figure id="Figure_01_05_037">

</figure>

Last, we vertically shift down by 3 to complete our sketch, as indicated
by the −3 on the outside of the function. See [\#](#).

<figure id="Figure_01_05_038">

</figure>
:::

:::: {#fs-id1165135497140 .note}
::: title
:::

Media

Access this online resource for additional instruction and practice with
transformation of functions.

Function Transformations
::::

# Key Equations {#fs-id1165135499979}

  ------------------------- -------------------------------
  Vertical shift            g(x)=f(x)+k (up for k\>0 )
  Horizontal shift          g(x)=f(x−h) (right for h\>0 )
  Vertical reflection       g(x)=−f(x)
  Horizontal reflection     g(x)=f(−x)
  Vertical stretch          g(x)=af(x) ( a\>0 )
  Vertical compression      g(x)=af(x) (0\<a\<1)
  Horizontal stretch        g(x)=f(bx) (0\<b\<1)
  Horizontal compression.   g(x)=f(bx) ( b\>1 )
  ------------------------- -------------------------------

# Key Concepts {#fs-id1165135264626}

A function can be shifted vertically by adding a constant to the output.
See

and

.

A function can be shifted horizontally by adding a constant to the
input. See

,

, and

.

Relating the shift to the context of a problem makes it possible to
compare and interpret vertical and horizontal shifts. See

.

Vertical and horizontal shifts are often combined. See

and

.

A vertical reflection reflects a graph about the

x

\-

axis. A graph can be reflected vertically by multiplying the output by
--1.

A horizontal reflection reflects a graph about the

y

\-

axis. A graph can be reflected horizontally by multiplying the input by
--1.

A graph can be reflected both vertically and horizontally. The order in
which the reflections are applied does not affect the final graph. See

.

A function presented in tabular form can also be reflected by
multiplying the values in the input and output rows or columns
accordingly. See

.

A function presented as an equation can be reflected by applying
transformations one at a time. See

.

Even functions are symmetric about the

y

\-

axis, whereas odd functions are symmetric about the origin.

Even functions satisfy the condition

f

(

x

)

=

f

(

−

x

)

.

Odd functions satisfy the condition

f

(

x

)

=

−

f

(

−

x

)

.

A function can be odd, even, or neither. See

.

A function can be compressed or stretched vertically by multiplying the
output by a constant. See

,

, and

.

A function can be compressed or stretched horizontally by multiplying
the input by a constant. See

,

, and

.

The order in which different transformations are applied does affect the
final function. Both vertical and horizontal transformations must be
applied in the order given. However, a vertical transformation may be
combined with a horizontal transformation in any order. See

and

.

# Section Exercises {#fs-id1165137436217}

## Verbal {#fs-id1165137728393}

When examining the formula of a function that is the result of multiple
transformations, how can you tell a horizontal shift from a vertical
shift?

A horizontal shift results when a constant is added to or subtracted
from the input. A vertical shifts results when a constant is added to or
subtracted from the output.

When examining the formula of a function that is the result of multiple
transformations, how can you tell a horizontal stretch from a vertical
stretch?

When examining the formula of a function that is the result of multiple
transformations, how can you tell a horizontal compression from a
vertical compression?

A horizontal compression results when a constant greater than 1 is
multiplied by the input. A vertical compression results when a constant
between 0 and 1 is multiplied by the output.

When examining the formula of a function that is the result of multiple
transformations, how can you tell a reflection with respect to the
*x*-axis from a reflection with respect to the *y*-axis?

How can you determine whether a function is odd or even from the formula
of the function?

For a function f, substitute (−x) for (x) in f(x). Simplify. If the
resulting function is the same as the original function, f(−x)=f(x),
then the function is even. If the resulting function is the opposite of
the original function, f(−x)=−f(x), then the original function is odd.
If the function is not the same or the opposite, then the function is
neither odd nor even.

## Algebraic {#fs-id1165137454081}

For the following exercises, write a formula for the function obtained
when the graph is shifted as described.

f(x)= x is shifted up 1 unit and to the left 2 units.

f(x)=\| x \| is shifted down 3 units and to the right 1 unit.

g(x)=\|x-1\|−3

f(x)= 1 x is shifted down 4 units and to the right 3 units.

f(x)= 1 x 2 is shifted up 2 units and to the left 4 units.

g(x)= 1 (x+4) 2 +2

For the following exercises, describe how the graph of the function is a
transformation of the graph of the original function f.

y=f(x−49)

y=f(x+43)

The graph of f(x+43) is a horizontal shift to the left 43 units of the
graph of f.

y=f(x+3)

y=f(x−4)

The graph of f(x-4) is a horizontal shift to the right 4 units of the
graph of f.

y=f(x)+5

y=f(x)+8

The graph of f(x)+8 is a vertical shift up 8 units of the graph of f.

y=f(x)−2

y=f(x)−7

The graph of f(x)−7 is a vertical shift down 7 units of the graph of f.

y=f(x−2)+3

y=f(x+4)−1

The graph of f(x+4)−1 is a horizontal shift to the left 4 units and a
vertical shift down 1 unit of the graph of f.

For the following exercises, determine the interval(s) on which the
function is increasing and decreasing.

f(x)=4 (x+1) 2 −5

g(x)=5 (x+3) 2 −2

decreasing on (−∞,−3) and increasing on (−3,∞)

a(x)= −x+4

k(x)=−3 x −1

decreasing on (0,∞)

## Graphical {#fs-id1165135403290}

For the following exercises, use the graph of f(x)= 2 x shown in [\#](#)
to sketch a graph of each transformation of f(x).

<figure id="Figure_01_05_201">

</figure>

g(x)= 2 x +1

h(x)= 2 x −3

w(x)= 2 x−1

For the following exercises, sketch a graph of the function as a
transformation of the graph of one of the toolkit functions.

f(t)= (t+1) 2 −3

h(x)=\|x−1\|+4

k(x)= (x−2) 3 −1

m(t)=3+ t+2

## Numeric {#fs-id1165137464226}

Tabular representations for the functions f,g, and h are given below.
Write g(x) and h(x) as transformations of f(x).

  ---------- ---- ---- ---- --- ---
     *x*      −2   −1   0    1   2
    *f(x)*    −2   −1   −3   1   2
  ---------- ---- ---- ---- --- ---

  ---------- ---- ---- ---- --- ---
     *x*      −1   0    1    2   3
    *g(x)*    −2   −1   −3   1   2
  ---------- ---- ---- ---- --- ---

  ---------- ---- ---- ---- --- ---
     *x*      −2   −1   0    1   2
    *h(x)*    −1   0    −2   2   3
  ---------- ---- ---- ---- --- ---

g(x)=f(x-1),h(x)=f(x)+1

Tabular representations for the functions f,g, and h are given below.
Write g(x) and h(x) as transformations of f(x).

  ---------- ---- ---- --- --- ---
     *x*      −2   −1   0   1   2
    *f(x)*    −1   −3   4   2   1
  ---------- ---- ---- --- --- ---

  ---------- ---- ---- ---- --- ---
     *x*      −3   −2   −1   0   1
    *g(x)*    −1   −3   4    2   1
  ---------- ---- ---- ---- --- ---

  ---------- ---- ---- --- --- ---
     *x*      −2   −1   0   1   2
    *h(x)*    −2   −4   3   1   0
  ---------- ---- ---- --- --- ---

For the following exercises, write an equation for each graphed function
by using transformations of the graphs of one of the toolkit functions.

f(x)=\|x-3\|−2

f(x)= x+3 −1

f(x)= (x-2) 2

f(x)=\|x+3\|−2

For the following exercises, use the graphs of transformations of the
square root function to find a formula for each of the functions.

f(x)=− x

For the following exercises, use the graphs of the transformed toolkit
functions to write a formula for each of the resulting functions.

f(x)=− (x+1) 2 +2

f(x)= −x +1

For the following exercises, determine whether the function is odd,
even, or neither.

f(x)=3 x 4

even

g(x)= x

h(x)= 1 x +3x

odd

f(x)= (x−2) 2

g(x)=2 x 4

even

h(x)=2x− x 3

For the following exercises, describe how the graph of each function is
a transformation of the graph of the original function f.

g(x)=−f(x)

The graph of g is a vertical reflection (across the x -axis) of the
graph of f.

g(x)=f(−x)

g(x)=4f(x)

The graph of g is a vertical stretch by a factor of 4 of the graph of f.

g(x)=6f(x)

g(x)=f(5x)

The graph of g is a horizontal compression by a factor of 1 5 of the
graph of f.

g(x)=f(2x)

g(x)=f( 1 3 x )

The graph of g is a horizontal stretch by a factor of 3 of the graph of
f.

g(x)=f( 1 5 x )

g(x)=3f( −x )

The graph of g is a horizontal reflection across the y -axis and a
vertical stretch by a factor of 3 of the graph of f.

g(x)=−f(3x)

For the following exercises, write a formula for the function g that
results when the graph of a given toolkit function is transformed as
described.

The graph of f(x)=\|x\| is reflected over the y *-*axis and horizontally
compressed by a factor of 1 4 .

g(x)=\|−4x\|

The graph of f(x)= x is reflected over the x -axis and horizontally
stretched by a factor of 2.

The graph of f(x)= 1 x 2 is vertically compressed by a factor of 1 3 ,
then shifted to the left 2 units and down 3 units.

g(x)= 1 3 (x+2) 2 −3

The graph of f(x)= 1 x is vertically stretched by a factor of 8, then
shifted to the right 4 units and up 2 units.

The graph of f(x)= x 2 is vertically compressed by a factor of 1 2 ,
then shifted to the right 5 units and up 1 unit.

g(x)= 1 2 (x-5) 2 +1

The graph of f(x)= x 2 is horizontally stretched by a factor of 3, then
shifted to the left 4 units and down 3 units.

For the following exercises, describe how the formula is a
transformation of a toolkit function. Then sketch a graph of the
transformation.

g(x)=4 (x+1) 2 −5

The graph of the function f(x)= x 2 is shifted to the left 1 unit,
stretched vertically by a factor of 4, and shifted down 5 units.

g(x)=5 (x+3) 2 −2

h(x)=−2\|x−4\|+3

The graph of f(x)=\|x\| is stretched vertically by a factor of 2,
shifted horizontally 4 units to the right, reflected across the
horizontal axis, and then shifted vertically 3 units up.

k(x)=−3 x −1

m(x)= 1 2 x 3

The graph of the function f(x)= x 3 is compressed vertically by a factor
of 1 2 .

n(x)= 1 3 \|x−2\|

p( x )= ( 1 3 x ) 3 −3

The graph of the function is stretched horizontally by a factor of 3 and
then shifted vertically downward by 3 units.

q( x )= ( 1 4 x ) 3 +1

a(x)= −x+4

The graph of f(x)= x is shifted right 4 units and then reflected across
the vertical line x=4.

For the following exercises, use the graph in [\#](#) to sketch the
given transformations.

<figure id="Figure_01_05_233">

</figure>

g(x)=f(x)−2

g(x)=−f(x)

g(x)=f(x+1)

g(x)=f(x−2)

# 

even function

a function whose graph is unchanged by horizontal reflection,

f

(

x

)

=

f

(

−

x

)

,

and is symmetric about the

y

\-

axis

horizontal compression

a transformation that compresses a function's graph horizontally, by
multiplying the input by a constant

b

\>

1

horizontal reflection

a transformation that reflects a function's graph across the

y

-axis by multiplying the input by

−1

horizontal shift

a transformation that shifts a function's graph left or right by adding
a positive or negative constant to the input

horizontal stretch

a transformation that stretches a function's graph horizontally by
multiplying the input by a constant

0

\<

b

\<

1

odd function

a function whose graph is unchanged by combined horizontal and vertical
reflection,

f

(

x

)

=

−

f

(

−

x

)

,

and is symmetric about the origin

vertical compression

a function transformation that compresses the function's graph
vertically by multiplying the output by a constant

0

\<

a

\<

1

vertical reflection

a transformation that reflects a function's graph across the

x

-axis by multiplying the output by

−1

vertical shift

a transformation that shifts a function's graph up or down by adding a
positive or negative constant to the output

vertical stretch

a transformation that stretches a function's graph vertically by
multiplying the output by a constant

a

\>

1
