m51267

> In this section, you will:
>
> Graph an absolute value function.
>
> Solve an absolute value equation.

2e387575-c04f-40e1-8895-195affae8fdb

#  {#fs-idm345650912}

## Learning Objectives {#fs-idm348086944}

Solve absolute value equations (IA 2.7.1)

Identify graphs of absolute value functions (IA 3.6.2)

## Objective 1: Solve absolute value equations (IA 2.7.1) {#eip-782}

Recall that in its basic form, 𝑓(𝑥)=\|𝑥\|, the absolute value function
is one of our toolkit functions. The absolute value function is often
thought of as providing the distance the number is from zero on a number
line. Numerically, for whatever the input value is, the output is the
magnitude of this value.

The absolute value function can be defined as a piecewise function

f(x)=\|x\|=-x , when x\<0 or x , when x≥0

:::: {#eip-279 .example}
::: title
Solve absolute value equations
:::

ⓐ Solve for x: \|x\|=5

Since the absolute value of a number is its distance from 0 on the
number line. Notice that both 5 and --5 are 5 units from 0 on the number
line.

If \|x\|=5 x=5, or x=--5

ⓑ Solve for x: \|2x--5\|=3

In this case the number represented by 2x--5 is 3 units from zero on the
number line. So 2x--5 could either equal 3 or --3.

2x-5=32x=8x=4

2x-5=-32x=2x=1
::::

### Practice Makes Perfect {#eip-445}

Solve absolute value equations.

Solve for *x*: \|x\|=0

Solve for *x*: \|x\|=2

Solve for *x*: \|x--2\|=6

Solve for *x*: \|2x+1\|=7

Solve for *t*: \|3t--1\|=--2

Solve for *z*: \|2z--3\|--4=1

Solve for *x*: --2\|x--3\|+8=--4

## Objective 2: Identify and graph absolute value functions (IA 3.6.2) {#eip-81}

Absolute value functions have a "V" shaped graph. If scanning this
function from left to right the corner is the point where the graph
changes direction.

f(x)=\|x\|=-x , when x\<0 or x , when x≥0

### Practice Makes Perfect {#eip-idm535368352}

Identify and graph absolute value functions. Graph each of the following
functions. Label at least one point on your graph.

y=\|x\|--2

y=\|2x\|+3

y=\|x--4\|+3

y=--\|x+6\|--4

y=--\|x--2\|

y=3\|x+1\|+4

Find the domain and range of the following absolute value function.

<figure id="Figure_01_06_001">

</figure>

Until the 1920s, the so-called spiral nebulae were believed to be clouds
of dust and gas in our own galaxy, some tens of thousands of light years
away. Then, astronomer Edwin Hubble proved that these objects are
galaxies in their own right, at distances of millions of light years.
Today, astronomers can detect galaxies that are billions of light years
away. Distances in the universe can be measured in all directions. As
such, it is useful to consider distance as an absolute value function.
In this section, we will continue our investigation of absolute value
functions.

# Understanding Absolute Value {#fs-id1165137426078}

Recall that in its basic form f(x)=\| x \|, the absolute value function
is one of our toolkit functions. The absolute value function is commonly
thought of as providing the distance the number is from zero on a number
line. Algebraically, for whatever the input value is, the output is the
value without regard to sign. Knowing this, we can use absolute value
functions to solve some kinds of real-world problems.

:::: {#fs-id1165135404116 .note}
::: title
Absolute Value Function
:::

The absolute value function can be defined as a piecewise function

$$f(x) = |x| = \left\{ \begin{matrix}
x & \text{if} & {x \geq 0} \\
{- x} & \text{if} & {x < 0}
\end{matrix} \right.$$
::::

::: {#Example_01_06_02 .example}
Electrical parts, such as resistors and capacitors, come with specified
values of their operating parameters: resistance, capacitance, etc.
However, due to imprecision in manufacturing, the actual values of these
parameters vary somewhat from piece to piece, even when they are
supposed to be the same. The best that manufacturers can do is to try to
guarantee that the variations will stay within a specified range, often
±1%,±5%, or ±10%.

Suppose we have a resistor rated at 680 ohms, ±5%. Use the absolute
value function to express the range of possible values of the actual
resistance.

We can find that 5% of 680 ohms is 34 ohms. The absolute value of the
difference between the actual and nominal resistance should not exceed
the stated variability, so, with the resistance R in ohms,

$$\left| R - 680 \middle| \leq 34 \right.$$
:::

:::: {#fs-id1165137540249 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Students who score within 20 points of 80 will pass a test. Write this
as a distance from 80 using absolute value notation.

using the variable p for passing, \| p−80 \|≤20
::::

# Graphing an Absolute Value Function {#fs-id1165135186288}

The most significant feature of the absolute value graph is the corner
point at which the graph changes direction. This point is shown at the
origin in [\#](#).

<figure id="Figure_01_06_003">

</figure>

[\#](#) shows the graph of y=2\| x--3 \|+4. The graph of y=\| x \| has
been shifted right 3 units, vertically stretched by a factor of 2, and
shifted up 4 units. This means that the corner point is located at ( 3,4
) for this transformed function.

<figure id="Figure_01_06_004">

</figure>

::: {#Example_01_06_03 .example}
Write an equation for the function graphed in [\#](#).

<figure id="Figure_01_06_005">

</figure>

The basic absolute value function changes direction at the origin, so
this graph has been shifted to the right 3 units and down 2 units from
the basic toolkit function. See [\#](#).

<figure id="Figure_01_06_006">

</figure>

We also notice that the graph appears vertically stretched, because the
width of the final graph on a horizontal line is not equal to 2 times
the vertical distance from the corner to this line, as it would be for
an unstretched absolute value function. Instead, the width is equal to 1
times the vertical distance as shown in [\#](#).

<figure id="Figure_01_06_007">

</figure>

From this information we can write the equation

$$\begin{array}{rcll}
{f(x)} & = & \left. 2 \middle| x - 3 \middle| - 2, \right. & {\quad\text{treating~the~stretch~as~}a\mspace{9mu}\text{vertical~stretch,or}} \\
{f(x)} & = & \left| 2(x - 3) \middle| - 2, \right. & {\quad\text{treating~the~stretch~as~}a\mspace{9mu}\text{horizontal~compression}.}
\end{array}$$

Note that these equations are algebraically equivalent---the stretch for
an absolute value function can be written interchangeably as a vertical
or horizontal stretch or compression. Note also that if the vertical
stretch factor is negative, there is also a reflection about the x-axis.
:::

:::: {#fs-id1165134377948 .note}
::: title
:::

Q&A

*If we couldn't observe the stretch of the function from the graphs,
could we algebraically determine it?*

*Yes. If we are unable to determine the stretch based on the width of
the graph, we can solve for the stretch factor by putting in a known
pair of values for x and f(x).*

$$\left. f(x) = a \middle| x - 3 \middle| - 2 \right.$$

*Now substituting in the point* (1, 2)

$$\begin{array}{rcl}
2 & = & \left. a \middle| 1 - 3 \middle| - 2 \right. \\
4 & = & {2a} \\
a & = & 2
\end{array}$$
::::

:::: {#fs-id1165137611709 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Write the equation for the absolute value function that is horizontally
shifted left 2 units, is vertically reflected, and vertically shifted up
3 units.

f(x)=−\| x+2 \|+3
::::

:::: {#fs-id1165135203778 .note}
::: title
:::

Q&A

*Do the graphs of absolute value functions always intersect the vertical
axis? The horizontal axis?*

*Yes, they always intersect the vertical axis. The graph of an absolute
value function will intersect the vertical axis when the input is zero.*

*No, they do not always intersect the horizontal axis. The graph may or
may not intersect the horizontal axis, depending on how the graph has
been shifted and reflected. It is possible for the absolute value
function to intersect the horizontal axis at zero, one, or two points
(see [\#](#)).*
::::

<figure id="Figure_01_06_008">

</figure>

# Solving an Absolute Value Equation {#fs-id1165133257286}

In [Other Type of Equations](#), we touched on the concepts of absolute
value equations. Now that we understand a little more about their
graphs, we can take another look at these types of equations. Now that
we can graph an absolute value function, we will learn how to solve an
absolute value equation. To solve an equation such as 8=\| 2x−6 \|, we
notice that the absolute value will be equal to 8 if the quantity inside
the absolute value is 8 or -8. This leads to two different equations we
can solve independently.

$$\begin{array}{rclcrcl}
{2x - 6} & = & 8 & {\quad\text{or}\quad} & {2x - 6} & = & -8 \\
{2x} & = & 14 & & {2x} & = & -2 \\
x & = & 7 & & x & = & -1
\end{array}$$

Knowing how to solve problems involving absolute value functions is
useful. For example, we may need to identify numbers or points on a line
that are at a specified distance from a given reference point.

An absolute value equation is an equation in which the unknown variable
appears in absolute value bars. For example,

$$\begin{array}{l}
\left| x \middle| = 4, \right. \\
\left| 2x - 1 \middle| = 3,\text{or} \right. \\
\left| 5x + 2 \middle| - 4 = 9 \right.
\end{array}$$

:::: {#fs-id1165137692078 .note}
::: title
Solutions to Absolute Value Equations
:::

For real numbers A and B , an equation of the form \| A \|=B, with B≥0,
will have solutions when A=B or A=−B. If B\<0, the equation \| A \|=B
has no solution.
::::

:::: {#fs-id1165135160087 .note}
::: title
:::

How To

*Given the formula for an absolute value function, find the horizontal
intercepts of its graph*.

Isolate the absolute value term.

Use

\|

A

\|

=

B

to write

A

=

B

or

−A

=

B

,

assuming

B

\>

0\.

Solve for

x

.
::::

::: {#Example_01_06_04 .example}
For the function f(x)=\|4x+1\|−7, find the values of x such that f(x)=0.

$$\begin{matrix}
0 & = & \left| 4x + 1 \middle| - 7 \right. & & & & & {\text{Substitute~0~for~}f(x).} \\
7 & = & |4x + 1| & & & & & {\text{Isolate~the~absolute~value~on~one~side~of~the~equation}.} \\
 & & & & & & & \\
 & & & & & & & \\
 & & & & & & & \\
7 & = & {4x + 1} & \text{or} & {\qquad-7} & = & {4x + 1} & {\text{Break~into~two~separate~equations~and~solve}.} \\
6 & = & {4x} & & -8 & = & {4x} & \\
 & & & & & & & \\
x & = & {\frac{6}{4} = 1.5} & & x & = & {\frac{- 8}{4} = - 2} & 
\end{matrix}$$

The function outputs 0 when x= 3 2 or x=−2. See [\#](#).

<figure id="Figure_01_06_011">

</figure>
:::

:::: {#fs-id1165137599670 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

For the function f(x)=\| 2x−1 \|−3, find the values of x such that
f(x)=0.

x=−1 or x=2
::::

:::: {#fs-id1165135175321 .note}
::: title
:::

Q&A

*Should we always expect two answers when solving \| A \|=B?*

*No. We may find one, two, or even no answers. For example, there is no
solution to* 2+\| 3x−5 \|=1.
::::

#  {#fs-id1165135571678}

:::: {#fs-id1165134257615 .note}
::: title
:::

Media

Access these online resources for additional instruction and practice
with absolute value.

Graphing Absolute Value Functions

Graphing Absolute Value Functions 2
::::

# Key Concepts {#fs-id1165133291312}

Applied problems, such as ranges of possible values, can also be solved
using the absolute value function. See

.

The graph of the absolute value function resembles a letter V. It has a
corner point at which the graph changes direction. See

.

In an absolute value equation, an unknown variable is the input of an
absolute value function.

If the absolute value of an expression is set equal to a positive
number, expect two solutions for the unknown variable. See

.

# Section Exercises {#fs-id1165135255406}

## Verbal {#fs-id1165137406985}

How do you solve an absolute value equation?

Isolate the absolute value term so that the equation is of the form
\|A\|=B. Form one equation by setting the expression inside the absolute
value symbol, A, equal to the expression on the other side of the
equation, B. Form a second equation by setting A equal to the opposite
of the expression on the other side of the equation, −B. Solve each
equation for the variable.

How can you tell whether an absolute value function has two
*x*-intercepts without graphing the function?

When solving an absolute value function, the isolated absolute value
term is equal to a negative number. What does that tell you about the
graph of the absolute value function?

The graph of the absolute value function does not cross the x -axis, so
the graph is either completely above or completely below the x -axis.

How can you use the graph of an absolute value function to determine the
*x*-values for which the function values are negative?

## Algebraic {#fs-id1165134273549}

Describe all numbers x that are at a distance of 4 from the number 8.
Express this set of numbers using absolute value notation.

The distance from x to 8 can be represented using the absolute value
statement: ∣ x − 8 ∣ = 4.

Describe all numbers x that are at a distance of 1 2 from the number −4.
Express this set of numbers using absolute value notation.

Describe the situation in which the distance that point x is from 10 is
at least 15 units. Express this set of numbers using absolute value
notation.

∣ x − 10 ∣ ≥ 15

Find all function values f(x) such that the distance from f(x) to the
value 8 is less than 0.03 units. Express this set of numbers using
absolute value notation.

For the following exercises, find the *x*- and *y*-intercepts of the
graphs of each function.

f(x)=4\| x−3 \|+4

There are no x-intercepts.

f(x)=−3\| x−2 \|−1

f(x)=−2\| x+1 \|+6

(−4, 0) and (2, 0)

f(x)=−5\|x+2\|+15

f(x)=2\|x−1\|−6

(0,−4),(4,0),(−2,0)

f(x)=\|−2x+1\|−13

f(x)=−\|x−9\|+16

(0,7),(25,0),(−7,0)

## Graphical {#fs-id1165137602379}

For the following exercises, graph the absolute value function. Plot at
least five points by hand for each graph.

y=\|x−1\|

y=\|x+1\|

y=\|x\|+1

For the following exercises, graph the given functions by hand.

y=\| x \|−2

y=−\| x \|

y=−\| x \|−2

y=−\| x−3 \|−2

f(x)=−\|x−1\|−2

f(x)=−\|x+3\|+4

f(x)=2\|x+3\|+1

f(x)=3\| x−2 \|+3

f(x)=\| 2x−4 \|−3

f( x )=\| 3x+9 \|+2

f(x)=−\| x−1 \|−3

f(x)=−\| x+4 \|−3

f(x)= 1 2 \| x+4 \|−3

## Technology {#fs-id1165137897208}

Use a graphing utility to graph f(x)=10\|x−2\| on the viewing window \[
0,4 \]. Identify the corresponding range. Show the graph.

Use a graphing utility to graph f(x)=−100\|x\|+100 on the viewing window
\[ −5,5 \]. Identify the corresponding range. Show the graph.

range: \[--400,100\]

For the following exercises, graph each function using a graphing
utility. Specify the viewing window.

f(x)=−0.1\| 0.1(0.2−x) \|+0.3

f(x)=4× 10 9 \| x−(5× 10 9 ) \|+2× 10 9

## Extensions {#fs-id1165137419467}

For the following exercises, solve the inequality.

If possible, find all values of a such that there are no x- intercepts
for f(x)=2\| x+1 \|+a.

If possible, find all values of a such that there are no y -intercepts
for f(x)=2\| x+1 \|+a.

There is no solution for a that will keep the function from having a y
-intercept. The absolute value function always crosses the y -intercept
when x=0.

## Real-World Applications {#fs-id1165135172151}

Cities A and B are on the same east-west line. Assume that city A is
located at the origin. If the distance from city A to city B is at least
100 miles and x represents the distance from city B to city A, express
this using absolute value notation.

The true proportion p of people who give a favorable rating to Congress
is 8% with a margin of error of 1.5%. Describe this statement using an
absolute value equation.

\| p−0.08 \|≤0.015

Students who score within 18 points of the number 82 will pass a
particular test. Write this statement using absolute value notation and
use the variable x for the score.

A machinist must produce a bearing that is within 0.01 inches of the
correct diameter of 5.0 inches. Using x as the diameter of the bearing,
write this statement using absolute value notation.

\| x−5.0 \|≤0.01

The tolerance for a ball bearing is 0.01. If the true diameter of the
bearing is to be 2.0 inches and the measured value of the diameter is x
inches, express the tolerance using absolute value notation.
