m51268

> In this section, you will:
>
> Verify inverse functions.
>
> Determine the domain and range of an inverse function, and restrict
> the domain of a function to make it one-to-one.
>
> Find or evaluate the inverse of a function.
>
> Use the graph of a one-to-one function to graph its inverse function
> on the same axes.

f592aad0-19d8-42d6-94b9-086bdd84c2b5

#  {#eip-234}

## Learning Objectives {#eip-idm379103664}

Find and evaluate composite functions (IA 10.1.1).

Determine whether a function is one-to-one (IA 10.1.2).

## Objective 1: Find and evaluate composite functions (IA 10.1.1). {#eip-idm365605792}

A composite function is a two-step function and can have numerical or
variable inputs.

fogx=fgx is read as "f of g of x".

To evaluate a composite function, we always start by evaluating the
inner function and then evaluate the outer function in terms of the
inner function.

:::: {#eip-470 .example}
::: title
Find and evaluate composite functions.
:::

For functions fx=2x-7 , gx=x+72 , find:

ⓐ

g

5

ⓑ

f

g

5

ⓒ

f

g

x

ⓐ

To find

g

5

, we evaluate

g

x

when

x

is 5.

g

x

=

x

\+

7

2

g

5

=

5

\+

7

2

=

12

2

=

6

ⓑ

To find

f

g

5

, we start evaluating the inner function

g

in terms of 5 (see part a) and then evaluate the outer function

f

in terms of this value.

f

(

g

5

)

=

f

(

6

)

=

2

(

6

)

\-

7

=

12

\-

7

=

5

ⓒ

In parts a and b we had numerical outputs because our inputs were
numbers. When we find

f

g

x

this will be a function written in terms of the variable x.

f

(

g

x

)

=

f

(

x

\+

7

2

)

=

2

(

x

\+

7

2

)

\-

7

=

x

\+

7

\-

7

=

x

This is interesting, notice that the functions

f

(

x

)

and

g

(

x

)

have a special relationship in that one undoes the other. We call
functions like this,

inverses

of one another. For any one-to-one function

f

(

x

)

, the inverse is a function

f

--1

(

x

)

such that

f

--1

(

f

(

x

)

)

=

x

.
::::

### Practice Makes Perfect {#eip-837}

Find and evaluate composite functions.

For each of the following function pairs find:

fx=x-23 , gx=x3+2

ⓐ f(gx)

ⓑ g(fx)

ⓒ Graph the functions f(x) and g(x) on the same coordinate system below

ⓓ What do you notice about the relationship between the graphs of f(x)
and g(x)?

f(x)=1(x+3) , g(x)=1x-3

ⓐ f(gx)

ⓑ g(fx)

ⓒ Graph the functions f(x) and g(x) on the same coordinate system below

ⓓ What do you notice about the relationship between the graphs of f(x)
and g(x)?

## Objective 2: Determine whether a function is one-to-one (IA 10.1.2). {#eip-851}

In creating a process called a function, f(x), it is often useful to
undo this process, or create an inverse to the function, f-1(x). When
finding the inverse, we restrict our work to one-to-one functions, this
means that the inverse we find should also be one-to-one. Remember that
the horizontal line test is a great way to check to see if a graph
represents a one-to-one function.

For any one-to-one function f(x), the inverse is a function f-1(x) such
that f-1(f(x))=x and f(f-1(x))=x .

The following key terms will be important to our understanding of
functions and their inverses.

Function: a relation in which each input value yields a unique output
value. Vertical line test: a method of testing whether a graph
represents a function by determining whether a vertical line intersects
the graph no more than once. One-to-one function: a function for which
each value of the output is associated with a unique input value.
Horizontal line test: a method of testing whether a function is
one-to-one by determining whether any horizontal line intersects the
graph more than once.

:::: {#fs-id1167833257674 .example}
::: title
Determine whether a function is one-to-one.
:::

Determine ⓐ whether each graph is the graph of a function and, if so, ⓑ
whether it is one-to-one.

ⓐ Since any vertical line intersects the graph in at most one point, the
graph is the graph of a function. Since any horizontal line intersects
the graph in at most one point, the graph is the graph of a one-to-one
function.

ⓑ Since any vertical line intersects the graph in at most one point, the
graph is the graph of a function. However, a horizontal line shown on
the graph may intersect it in two points. This graph does not represent
a one-to-one function.
::::

### Practice Makes Perfect {#eip-710}

Determine whether each graph is the graph of a function and, if so,
whether it is one-to-one.

A reversible heat pump is a climate-control system that is an air
conditioner and a heater in a single device. Operated in one direction,
it pumps heat out of a house to provide cooling. Operating in reverse,
it pumps heat into the building from the outside, even in cool weather,
to provide heating. As a heater, a heat pump is several times more
efficient than conventional electrical resistance heating.

If some physical machines can run in two directions, we might ask
whether some of the function "machines" we have been studying can also
run backwards. [\#](#) provides a visual representation of this
question. In this section, we will consider the reverse nature of
functions.

<figure id="Figure_01_07_001">

</figure>

# Verifying That Two Functions Are Inverse Functions {#fs-id1165137725994}

Betty is traveling to Milan for a fashion show and wants to know what
the temperature will be. She is not familiar with the Celsius scale. To
get an idea of how temperature measurements are related, Betty wants to
convert 75 degrees Fahrenheit to degrees Celsius using the formula

$$C = \frac{5}{9}(F - 32)$$

and substitutes 75 for F to calculate

$$\frac{5}{9}(75 - 32) \approx 24\text{°C}$$

Knowing that a comfortable 75 degrees Fahrenheit is about 24 degrees
Celsius, Betty gets the week's weather forecast from [\#](#) for Milan,
and wants to convert all of the temperatures to degrees Fahrenheit.

<figure id="Figure_01_07_002">

</figure>

At first, Betty considers using the formula she has already found to
complete the conversions. After all, she knows her algebra, and can
easily solve the equation for F after substituting a value for C. For
example, to convert 26 degrees Celsius, she could write

$$\begin{array}{rcl}
26 & = & {\frac{5}{9}(F - 32)} \\
{26 \cdot \frac{9}{5}} & = & {F - 32} \\
F & = & {26 \cdot \frac{9}{5} + 32 \approx 79}
\end{array}$$

After considering this option for a moment, however, she realizes that
solving the equation for each of the temperatures will be awfully
tedious. She realizes that since evaluation is easier than solving, it
would be much more convenient to have a different formula, one that
takes the Celsius temperature and outputs the Fahrenheit temperature.

The formula for which Betty is searching corresponds to the idea of an
*inverse function*, which is a function for which the input of the
original function becomes the output of the inverse function and the
output of the original function becomes the input of the inverse
function.

Given a function f(x), we represent its inverse as f −1 (x), read as "f
inverse of x." The raised −1 is part of the notation. It is not an
exponent; it does not imply a power of −1 . In other words, f −1 (x)
does *not* mean 1 f(x) because 1 f(x) is the reciprocal of f and not the
inverse.

The "exponent-like" notation comes from an analogy between function
composition and multiplication: just as a −1 a=1 (1 is the identity
element for multiplication) for any nonzero number a, so f −1 ∘f equals
the identity function, that is,

$$\left( {f^{- 1} \circ f} \right)(x) = f^{- 1}\left( {f(x)} \right) = f^{- 1}(y) = x$$

This holds for all x in the domain of f. Informally, this means that
inverse functions "undo" each other. However, just as zero does not have
a reciprocal, some functions do not have inverses.

Given a function f(x), we can verify whether some other function g(x) is
the inverse of f(x) by checking if both g(f(x))=x and f(g(x))=x are
true.

For example, y=4x and y= 1 4 x are inverse functions.

$$\left( {f^{- 1} \circ f} \right)(x) = f^{- 1}\left( {4x} \right) = \frac{1}{4}\left( {4x} \right) = x$$

and

$$\left( {f^{} \circ f^{- 1}} \right)(x) = f\left( {\frac{1}{4}x} \right) = 4\left( {\frac{1}{4}x} \right) = x$$

A few coordinate pairs from the graph of the function y=4x are (−2, −8),
(0, 0), and (2, 8). A few coordinate pairs from the graph of the
function y= 1 4 x are (−8, −2), (0, 0), and (8, 2). If we interchange
the input and output of each coordinate pair of a function, the
interchanged coordinate pairs would appear on the graph of the inverse
function.

:::: {#fs-id1165137933105 .note}
::: title
Inverse Function
:::

For any one-to-one function f(x)=y, a function f −1 ( x ) is an inverse
function of f if f −1 (y)=x. This can also be written as f −1 (f(x))=x
for all x in the domain of f. It also follows that f( f −1 (x))=x for
all x in the domain of f −1 if f −1 is the inverse of f.

The notation f −1 is read " f inverse." Like any other function, we can
use any variable name as the input for f −1 , so we will often write f
−1 (x), which we read as "f inverse of x." Keep in mind that

$$f^{- 1}(x) \neq \frac{1}{f(x)}$$

and not all functions have inverses.
::::

::: {#Example_01_07_01 .example}
If for a particular one-to-one function f(2)=4 and f(5)=12, what are the
corresponding input and output values for the inverse function?

The inverse function reverses the input and output quantities, so if

$$\begin{array}{rcl}
{f(2)} & = & {4,\mspace{9mu}\text{then~}f^{-1}(4) = 2;} \\
{f(5)} & = & {12,{\mspace{9mu}\text{then~f}}^{-1}(12) = 5.}
\end{array}$$

Alternatively, if we want to name the inverse function g, then g(4)=2
and g(12)=5.

Notice that if we show the coordinate pairs in a table form, the input
and output are clearly reversed. See [\#](#).

  ( x,f(x) )   ( x,g(x) )
  ------------ ------------
  ( 2,4 )      ( 4,2 )
  ( 5,12 )     ( 12,5 )
:::

:::: {#fs-id1165137635377 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Given that h −1 (6)=2, what are the corresponding input and output
values of the original function h?

h(2)=6
::::

:::: {#fs-id1165134357354 .note}
::: title
:::

How To

*Given two functions f(x) and g(x), test whether the functions are
inverses of each other.*

Determine whether

f

(

g

(

x

)

)

=

x

or

g

(

f

(

x

)

)

=

x

.

If both statements are true, then

g

=

f

−

1

and

f

=

g

−

1

.

If either statement is false, then both are false, and

g

≠

f

−

1

and

f

≠

g

−

1

.
::::

::: {#Example_01_07_02 .example}
If f( x )= 1 x+2 and g( x )= 1 x −2, is g= f −1 ?

$$\begin{array}{ccl}
{g(f(x))} & = & {\frac{1}{\left( \frac{1}{x + 2} \right)} - 2} \\
 & = & {x + 2 - 2} \\
 & = & x
\end{array}$$

We must also verify the other formula.

$$\begin{array}{ccl}
{f(g(x))} & = & \frac{1}{\frac{1}{x} - 2 + 2} \\
 & = & \frac{1}{\frac{1}{x}} \\
 & = & x
\end{array}$$

so

$$g = f^{- 1}\mspace{9mu}\text{and~}f = g^{- 1}$$

Notice the inverse operations are in reverse order of the operations
from the original function.
:::

:::: {#fs-id1165137911663 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

If f( x )= x 3 −4 and g( x )= x+4 3 , is g= f −1 ?

Yes
::::

::: {#Example_01_07_03 .example}
If f(x)= x 3 (the cube function) and g(x)= 1 3 x, is g= f −1 ?

$$f\left( {g(x)} \right) = \frac{x^{3}}{27} \neq x$$

No, the functions are not inverses.

The correct inverse to the cube is, of course, the cube root x 3 = x 1 3
, that is, the one-third is an exponent, not a multiplier.
:::

:::: {#fs-id1165137806084 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

If f( x )= ( x−1 ) 3 andg( x )= x 3 +1, is g= f −1 ?

Yes
::::

# Finding Domain and Range of Inverse Functions {#fs-id1165137660004}

The outputs of the function f are the inputs to f −1 , so the range of f
is also the domain of f −1 . Likewise, because the inputs to f are the
outputs of f −1 , the domain of f is the range of f −1 . We can
visualize the situation as in [\#](#).

<figure id="Figure_01_07_003">

</figure>

When a function has no inverse function, it is possible to create a new
function where that new function on a limited domain does have an
inverse function. For example, the inverse of f(x)= x is f −1 (x)= x 2 ,
because a square "undoes" a square root; but the square is only the
inverse of the square root on the domain \[ 0,∞ ), since that is the
range of f(x)= x .

We can look at this problem from the other side, starting with the
square (toolkit quadratic) function f(x)= x 2 . If we want to construct
an inverse to this function, we run into a problem, because for every
given output of the quadratic function, there are two corresponding
inputs (except when the input is 0). For example, the output 9 from the
quadratic function corresponds to the inputs 3 and --3. But an output
from a function is an input to its inverse; if this inverse input
corresponds to more than one inverse output (input of the original
function), then the "inverse" is not a function at all! To put it
differently, the quadratic function is not a one-to-one function; it
fails the horizontal line test, so it does not have an inverse function.
In order for a function to have an inverse, it must be a one-to-one
function.

In many cases, if a function is not one-to-one, we can still restrict
the function to a part of its domain on which it is one-to-one. For
example, we can make a restricted version of the square function f(x)= x
2 with its domain limited to \[ 0,∞ ), which is a one-to-one function
(it passes the horizontal line test) and which has an inverse (the
square-root function).

If f(x)= ( x−1 ) 2 on \[ 1,∞ ), then the inverse function is f −1 (x)= x
+1.

The domain of

f

= range of

f

−

1

=

\[

1

,

∞

)

.

The domain of

f

−

1

= range of

f

=

\[

0

,

∞

)

.

:::: {#fs-id1165137733804 .note}
::: title
:::

Q&A

*Is it possible for a function to have more than one inverse?*

*No. If two supposedly different functions, say, g and h, both meet the
definition of being inverses of another function f, then you can prove
that g=h. We have just seen that some functions only have inverses if we
restrict the domain of the original function. In these cases, there may
be more than one way to restrict the domain, leading to different
inverses. However, on any one domain, the original function still has
only one unique inverse.*
::::

:::: {#fs-id1165137704938 .note}
::: title
Domain and Range of Inverse Functions
:::

The range of a function f(x) is the domain of the inverse function f −1
(x).

The domain of f(x) is the range of f −1 (x).
::::

:::: {#fs-id1165135308785 .note}
::: title
:::

How To

*Given a function, find the domain and range of its inverse.*

If the function is one-to-one, write the range of the original function
as the domain of the inverse, and write the domain of the original
function as the range of the inverse.

If the domain of the original function needs to be restricted to make it
one-to-one, then this restricted domain becomes the range of the inverse
function.
::::

::: {#Example_01_07_05 .example}
Identify which of the toolkit functions besides the quadratic function
are not one-to-one, and find a restricted domain on which each function
is one-to-one, if any. The toolkit functions are reviewed in [\#](#). We
restrict the domain in such a fashion that the function assumes all
*y*-values exactly once.

  --------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Constant       Identity       Quadratic      Cubic          Reciprocal
  -------------- -------------- -------------- -------------- --------------
  f(x)=c         f(x)=x         f(x)= x 2      f(x)= x 3      f(x)= 1 x

  *Reciprocal    *Cube root*    *Square root*  *Absolute      
  squared*                                     value*         

  f(x)= 1 x 2    f(x)= x 3      f(x)= x        f(x)=\| x \|   
  --------------------------------------------------------------------------

The constant function is not one-to-one, and there is no domain (except
a single point) on which it could be one-to-one, so the constant
function has no inverse.

The absolute value function can be restricted to the domain \[ 0,∞ ),
where it is equal to the identity function.

The reciprocal-squared function can be restricted to the domain ( 0,∞ ).

We can see that these functions (if unrestricted) are not one-to-one by
looking at their graphs, shown in [\#](#). They both would fail the
horizontal line test. However, if a function is restricted to a certain
domain so that it passes the horizontal line test, then in that
restricted domain, it can have an inverse.

<figure id="Figure_01_07_004">

</figure>
:::

:::: {#fs-id1165137544599 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

The domain of function f is (1,∞) and the range of function f is
(−∞,−2). Find the domain and range of the inverse function.

The domain of function f −1 is (−∞,−2) and the range of function f −1 is
(1,∞).
::::

# Finding and Evaluating Inverse Functions {#fs-id1165137619159}

Once we have a one-to-one function, we can evaluate its inverse at
specific inverse function inputs or construct a complete representation
of the inverse function in many cases.

## Inverting Tabular Functions {#fs-id1165135466392}

Suppose we want to find the inverse of a function represented in table
form. Remember that the domain of a function is the range of the inverse
and the range of the function is the domain of the inverse. So we need
to interchange the domain and range.

Each row (or column) of inputs becomes the row (or column) of outputs
for the inverse function. Similarly, each row (or column) of outputs
becomes the row (or column) of inputs for the inverse function.

::: {#Example_01_07_06 .example}
A function f(t) is given in [\#](#), showing distance in miles that a
car has traveled in t minutes. Find and interpret f −1 (70).

  ------------------- ---- ---- ---- ----
  *t(minutes)*        30   50   70   90
  *f( t )(miles)*     20   40   60   70
  ------------------- ---- ---- ---- ----

The inverse function takes an output of f and returns an input for f. So
in the expression f −1 (70), 70 is an output value of the original
function, representing 70 miles. The inverse will return the
corresponding input of the original function f, 90 minutes, so f −1
(70)=90. The interpretation of this is that, to drive 70 miles, it took
90 minutes.

Alternatively, recall that the definition of the inverse was that if
f(a)=b, then f −1 (b)=a. By this definition, if we are given f −1
(70)=a, then we are looking for a value a so that f(a)=70. In this case,
we are looking for a t so that f(t)=70, which is when t=90.
:::

:::: {#fs-id1165135169494 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Using [\#](#), find and interpret ⓐ f(60), and ⓑ f −1 (60).

  ------------------- ---- ---- ---- ---- ----
  *t(minutes)*        30   50   60   70   90
  *f( t )(miles)*     20   40   50   60   70
  ------------------- ---- ---- ---- ---- ----

ⓐ

f

(

60

)

=

50\.

In 60 minutes, 50 miles are traveled.

ⓑ

f

−

1

(

60

)

=

70\.

To travel 60 miles, it will take 70 minutes.
::::

## Evaluating the Inverse of a Function, Given a Graph of the Original Function {#fs-id1165137418615}

We saw in [Functions and Function Notation](#) that the domain of a
function can be read by observing the horizontal extent of its graph. We
find the domain of the inverse function by observing the *vertical*
extent of the graph of the original function, because this corresponds
to the horizontal extent of the inverse function. Similarly, we find the
range of the inverse function by observing the *horizontal* extent of
the graph of the original function, as this is the vertical extent of
the inverse function. If we want to evaluate an inverse function, we
find its input within its domain, which is all or part of the vertical
axis of the original function's graph.

:::: {#fs-id1165133045388 .note}
::: title
:::

How To

*Given the graph of a function, evaluate its inverse at specific
points.*

Find the desired input on the

y

-axis of the given graph.

Read the inverse function's output from the

x

-axis of the given graph.
::::

::: {#Example_01_07_07 .example}
A function g(x) is given in [\#](#). Find g(3) and g −1 (3).

<figure id="Figure_01_07_006">

</figure>

To evaluate g(3), we find 3 on the *x*-axis and find the corresponding
output value on the *y*-axis. The point ( 3,1 ) tells us that g(3)=1.

To evaluate g −1 (3), recall that by definition g −1 (3) means the value
of *x* for which g(x)=3. By looking for the output value 3 on the
vertical axis, we find the point ( 5,3 ) on the graph, which means
g(5)=3, so by definition, g −1 (3)=5. See [\#](#).

<figure id="Figure_01_07_007">

</figure>
:::

:::: {#fs-id1165137667918 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Using the graph in [\#](#), ⓐ find g −1 (1), and ⓑ estimate g −1 (4).

ⓐ

3

ⓑ

5.6
::::

## Finding Inverses of Functions Represented by Formulas {#fs-id1165137605437}

Sometimes we will need to know an inverse function for all elements of
its domain, not just a few. If the original function is given as a
formula---for example, y as a function of x--- we can often find the
inverse function by solving to obtain x as a function of y.

:::: {#fs-id1165137652548 .note}
::: title
:::

How To

*Given a function represented by a formula, find the inverse.*

Make sure

f

is a one-to-one function.

Solve for

x

.

Interchange

x

and

y

.

Replace

y

with

f

\-

1

(

x

)

. (Variables may be different in different cases, but the principle is
the same.)
::::

::: {#Example_01_07_08 .example}
Find a formula for the inverse function that gives Fahrenheit
temperature as a function of Celsius temperature.

$$C = \frac{5}{9}(F - 32)$$

$$\begin{array}{rcl}
C & = & {\frac{5}{9}(F - 32)} \\
{C \cdot \frac{9}{5}} & = & {F - 32} \\
F & = & {\frac{9}{5}C + 32}
\end{array}$$

By solving in general, we have uncovered the inverse function. If

$$C = h(F) = \frac{5}{9}(F - 32),$$

then

$$F = h^{- 1}(C) = \frac{9}{5}C + 32$$

In this case, we introduced a function h to represent the conversion
because the input and output variables are descriptive, and writing C −1
could get confusing.
:::

:::: {#fs-id1165135237072 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Solve for x in terms of y given y= 1 3 (x−5).

x=3y+5
::::

::: {#Example_01_07_09 .example}
Find the inverse of the function f( x )= 2 x−3 +4.

$$\begin{array}{rcll}
y & = & {\frac{2}{x - 3} + 4} & {\qquad\text{Set~up~an~equation}.} \\
{y - 4} & = & \frac{2}{x - 3} & {\qquad\text{Subtract~4~from~both~sides}.} \\
{x - 3} & = & \frac{2}{y - 4} & {\qquad\text{Multiply~both~sides~by~}x - 3\mspace{9mu}\text{and~divide~by~}y - 4.} \\
x & = & {\frac{2}{y - 4} + 3} & {\qquad\text{Add~3~to~both~sides}.}
\end{array}$$

So f −1 ( y )= 2 y−4 +3 or f −1 ( x )= 2 x−4 +3.

The domain and range of f exclude the values 3 and 4, respectively. f
and f −1 are equal at two points but are not the same function, as we
can see by creating [\#](#).

  ---------- --- --- --- ----------
  *x*        1   2   5   f −1 (y)
  *f(x)*     3   2   5   y
  ---------- --- --- --- ----------
:::

::: {#Example_01_07_10 .example}
Find the inverse of the function f(x)=2+ x−4 .

$$\begin{array}{rcl}
y & = & {2 + \sqrt{x - 4}} \\
{(y - 2)}^{2} & = & {x - 4} \\
x & = & {{(y - 2)}^{2} + 4}
\end{array}$$

So f −1 ( x )= ( x−2 ) 2 +4.

The domain of f is \[4,∞). Notice that the range of f is \[2,∞), so this
means that the domain of the inverse function f −1 is also \[2,∞).

The formula we found for f −1 ( x ) looks like it would be valid for all
real x. However, f −1 itself must have an inverse (namely, f ) so we
have to restrict the domain of f −1 to \[2,∞) in order to make f −1 a
one-to-one function. This domain of f −1 is exactly the range of f.
:::

:::: {#fs-id1165137640068 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

What is the inverse of the function f(x)=2− x ? State the domains of
both the function and the inverse function.

f −1 (x)= ( 2−x ) 2 ; domainoff:\[ 0,∞ ); domainof f −1 :( −∞,2 \]
::::

# Finding Inverse Functions and Their Graphs {#fs-id1165137473011}

Now that we can find the inverse of a function, we will explore the
graphs of functions and their inverses. Let us return to the quadratic
function f(x)= x 2 restricted to the domain \[0,∞), on which this
function is one-to-one, and graph it as in [\#](#).

<figure id="Figure_01_07_008">

</figure>

Restricting the domain to \[0,∞) makes the function one-to-one (it will
obviously pass the horizontal line test), so it has an inverse on this
restricted domain.

We already know that the inverse of the toolkit quadratic function is
the square root function, that is, f −1 (x)= x . What happens if we
graph both f and f −1 on the same set of axes, using the x- axis for the
input to both fand   f −1 ?

We notice a distinct relationship: The graph of f −1 (x) is the graph of
f(x) reflected about the diagonal line y=x, which we will call the
identity line, shown in [\#](#).

<figure id="Figure_01_07_009">

</figure>

This relationship will be observed for all one-to-one functions, because
it is a result of the function and its inverse swapping inputs and
outputs. This is equivalent to interchanging the roles of the vertical
and horizontal axes.

::: {#Example_01_07_11 .example}
Given the graph of f(x) in [\#](#), sketch a graph of f −1 (x).

<figure id="Figure_01_07_010">

</figure>

This is a one-to-one function, so we will be able to sketch an inverse.
Note that the graph shown has an apparent domain of ( 0,∞ ) and range of
( −∞,∞ ), so the inverse will have a domain of ( −∞,∞ ) and range of (
0,∞ ).

If we reflect this graph over the line y=x, the point ( 1,0 ) reflects
to ( 0,1 ) and the point ( 4,2 ) reflects to ( 2,4 ). Sketching the
inverse on the same axes as the original graph gives [\#](#).

<figure id="Figure_01_07_011">

</figure>
:::

:::: {#fs-id1165135187125 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Draw graphs of the functions f and f −1 from [\#](#).
::::

:::: {#fs-id1165137627081 .note}
::: title
:::

Q&A

*Is there any function that is equal to its own inverse?*

*Yes. If f= f −1 , then f( f( x ) )=x, and we can think of several
functions that have this property. The identity function does, and so
does the reciprocal function, because*

$$\frac{1}{\frac{1}{x}} = x$$

*Any function f( x )=c−x, where c is a constant, is also equal to its
own inverse.*
::::

:::: {#fs-id1165137410410 .note}
::: title
:::

Media

Access these online resources for additional instruction and practice
with inverse functions.

Inverse Functions

One-to-one Functions

Inverse Function Values Using Graph

Restricting the Domain and Finding the Inverse
::::

# Key Concepts {#fs-id1165137591826}

If

g

(

x

)

is the inverse of

f

(

x

)

,

then

g

(

f

(

x

)

)

=

f

(

g

(

x

)

)

=

x

.

See

,

, and

.

Only some of the toolkit functions have an inverse. See

.

For a function to have an inverse, it must be one-to-one (pass the
horizontal line test).

A function that is not one-to-one over its entire domain may be
one-to-one on part of its domain.

For a tabular function, exchange the input and output rows to obtain the
inverse. See

.

The inverse of a function can be determined at specific points on its
graph. See

.

To find the inverse of a formula, solve the equation

y

=

f

(

x

)

for

x

as a function of

y

.

Then exchange the labels

x

and

y

.

See

,

, and

.

The graph of an inverse function is the reflection of the graph of the
original function across the line

y

=

x

.

See

.

# Section Exercises {#fs-id1165137871042}

## Verbal {#fs-id1165135187563}

Describe why the horizontal line test is an effective way to determine
whether a function is one-to-one?

Each output of a function must have exactly one output for the function
to be one-to-one. If any horizontal line crosses the graph of a function
more than once, that means that y -values repeat and the function is not
one-to-one. If no horizontal line crosses the graph of the function more
than once, then no y -values repeat and the function is one-to-one.

Why do we restrict the domain of the function f(x)= x 2 to find the
function's inverse?

Can a function be its own inverse? Explain.

Yes. For example, f(x)= 1 x is its own inverse.

Are one-to-one functions either always increasing or always decreasing?
Why or why not?

How do you find the inverse of a function algebraically?

Given a function y=f(x), solve for x in terms of y. Interchange the x
and y. Solve the new equation for y. The expression for y is the
inverse, y= f −1 (x).

## Algebraic {#fs-id1165137836714}

Show that the function f(x)=a−x is its own inverse for all real numbers
a.

For the following exercises, find f −1 (x) for each function.

f(x)=x+3

f −1 (x)=x−3

f(x)=x+5

f(x)=2−x

f −1 (x)=2−x

f(x)=3−x

f(x)= x x+2

f −1 (x)= −2x x−1

f(x)= 2x+3 5x+4

For the following exercises, find a domain on which each function f is
one-to-one and non-decreasing. Write the domain in interval notation.
Then find the inverse of f restricted to that domain.

f(x)= (x+7) 2

domain of f(x):\[−7,∞); f −1 (x)= x −7

f(x)= (x−6) 2

f(x)= x 2 −5

domain of f(x):\[0,∞); f −1 (x)= x+5

Given f( x )= x 2+x and g(x)= 2x 1−x :

ⓐ

Find

f

(

g

(

x

)

)

and

g

(

f

(

x

)

)

.

ⓑ

What does the answer tell us about the relationship between

f

(

x

)

and

g

(

x

)

?

ⓐ

f

(

g

(

x

)

)

=

x

and

g

(

f

(

x

)

)

=

x

.

ⓑ

This tells us that

f

and

g

are inverse functions

For the following exercises, use function composition to verify that
f(x) and g(x) are inverse functions.

f(x)= x−1 3 and g(x)= x 3 +1

 f(g(x))=x,g(f(x))=x

f(x)=−3x+5 and g(x)= x−5 −3

## Graphical {#fs-id1165135188614}

For the following exercises, use a graphing utility to determine whether
each function is one-to-one.

f(x)= x

one-to-one

f(x)= 3x+1 3

f(x)=−5x+1

one-to-one

f(x)= x 3 −27

For the following exercises, determine whether the graph represents a
one-to-one function.

not one-to-one

For the following exercises, use the graph of f shown in [\#](#).

<figure id="Figure_01_07_203">

</figure>

Find f( 0 ).

3

Solve f(x)=0.

Find f −1 ( 0 ).

2

Solve f −1 ( x )=0.

For the following exercises, use the graph of the one-to-one function
shown in [\#](#).

<figure id="Figure_01_07_204">

</figure>

Sketch the graph of f −1 .

Find f(6)and  f −1 (2).

If the complete graph of f is shown, find the domain of f.

\[ 2,10 \]

If the complete graph of f is shown, find the range of f.

## Numeric {#fs-id1165135434734}

For the following exercises, evaluate or solve, assuming that the
function f is one-to-one.

If f(6)=7, find f −1 (7).

6

If f(3)=2, find f −1 (2).

If f −1 ( −4 )=−8, find f(−8).

−4

If f −1 ( −2 )=−1, find f(−1).

For the following exercises, use the values listed in [\#](#) to
evaluate or solve.

  ---------- --- --- --- --- --- --- --- --- --- ---
  *x*        0   1   2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9
  *f(x)*     8   0   7   4   2   6   5   3   9   1
  ---------- --- --- --- --- --- --- --- --- --- ---

Find f( 1 ).

0

Solve f(x)=3.

Find f −1 ( 0 ).

1

Solve f −1 ( x )=7.

Use the tabular representation of f in [\#](#) to create a table for f
−1 ( x ).

  ---------- --- --- --- ---- ----
  *x*        3   6   9   13   14
  *f(x)*     1   4   7   12   16
  ---------- --- --- --- ---- ----

  ---------- --- --- --- ---- ----
  x          1   4   7   12   16
  f −1 (x)   3   6   9   13   14
  ---------- --- --- --- ---- ----

## Technology {#fs-id1165137641552}

For the following exercises, find the inverse function. Then, graph the
function and its inverse.

f(x)= 3 x−2

f(x)= x 3 −1

f −1 (x)= (1+x) 1/3

Find the inverse function of f(x)= 1 x−1 . Use a graphing utility to
find its domain and range. Write the domain and range in interval
notation.

## Real-World Applications {#fs-id1165137592239}

To convert from x degrees Celsius to y degrees Fahrenheit, we use the
formula f(x)= 9 5 x+32. Find the inverse function, if it exists, and
explain its meaning.

f −1 (x)= 5 9 ( x−32 ). Given the Fahrenheit temperature, x, this
formula allows you to calculate the Celsius temperature.

The circumference C of a circle is a function of its radius given by
C(r)=2πr. Express the radius of a circle as a function of its
circumference. Call this function r(C). Find r(36π) and interpret its
meaning.

A car travels at a constant speed of 50 miles per hour. The distance the
car travels in miles is a function of time, t, in hours given by
d(t)=50t. Find the inverse function by expressing the time of travel in
terms of the distance traveled. Call this function t(d). Find t(180) and
interpret its meaning.

t(d)= d 50 , t(180)= 180 50 . The time for the car to travel 180 miles
is 3.6 hours.

# Chapter Review Exercises {#fs-id1165135177582}

## [Functions and Function Notation](#) {#eip-id1165135176875}

For the following exercises, determine whether the relation is a
function.

{ (a,b),(c,d),(e,d) }

function

{ (5,2),(6,1),(6,2),(4,8) }

y 2 +4=x, for x the independent variable and y the dependent variable

not a function

Is the graph in [\#](#) a function?

<figure id="Figure_01_07_208">

</figure>

For the following exercises, evaluate f(−3);f(2);f(−a);−f(a);f(a+h).

f(x)=−2 x 2 +3x

f(−3)=−27; f(2)=−2; f(−a)=−2 a 2 −3a; −f(a)=2 a 2 −3a; f(a+h)=−2 a 2
+3a−4ah+3h−2 h 2

f(x)=2\| 3x−1 \|

For the following exercises, determine whether the functions are
one-to-one.

f(x)=−3x+5

one-to-one

f(x)=\| x−3 \|

For the following exercises, use the vertical line test to determine if
the relation whose graph is provided is a function.

function

function

For the following exercises, graph the functions.

f(x)=\| x+1 \|

f(x)= x 2 −2

For the following exercises, use [\#](#) to approximate the values.

<figure id="Figure_01_07_215">

</figure>

f(2)

f(−2)

2

If f(x)=−2, then solve for x.

If f(x)=1, then solve for x.

x=−1.8 or or x=1.8

For the following exercises, use the function h(t)=−16 t 2 +80t to find
the values in simplest form.

h(2)−h(1) 2−1

h(a)−h(1) a−1

−64+80a−16 a 2 −1+a =−16a+64

## [Domain and Range](#) {#eip-id1165132944714}

For the following exercises, find the domain of each function,
expressing answers using interval notation.

f(x)= 2 3x+2

f(x)= x−3 x 2 −4x−12

( −∞,−2 )∪( −2,6 )∪( 6,∞ )

f(x)= x−6 x−4

Graph this piecewise function: f(x)={ x+1       x\<−2 −2x−3  x≥−2

## [Rates of Change and Behavior of Graphs](#) {#eip-id1165133183577}

For the following exercises, find the average rate of change of the
functions from x=1to x=2.

f(x)=4x−3

f(x)=10 x 2 +x

31

f(x)=− 2 x 2

For the following exercises, use the graphs to determine the intervals
on which the functions are increasing, decreasing, or constant.

increasing ( 2,∞ ); decreasing (−∞,2)

increasing ( −3,1 ); constant (−∞,−3)∪( 1,∞ )

Find the local minimum of the function graphed in [\#](#).

Find the local extrema for the function graphed in [\#](#).

local minimum ( −2,−3 ); local maximum ( 1,3 )

For the graph in [\#](#), the domain of the function is \[ −3,3 \]. The
range is \[ −10,10 \]. Find the absolute minimum of the function on this
interval.

Find the absolute maximum of the function graphed in [\#](#).

<figure id="Figure_01_07_219">

</figure>

( −1.8,10 )

## [Composition of Functions](#) {#eip-id1165131815810}

For the following exercises, find (f∘g)(x) and (g∘f)(x) for each pair of
functions.

f(x)=4−x,g(x)=−4x

f(x)=3x+2,g(x)=5−6x

( f∘g )(x)=17−18x;( g∘f )(x)=−7−18x

f(x)= x 2 +2x,g(x)=5x+1

f(x)= x+2 ,g(x)= 1 x

( f∘g )(x)= 1 x +2 ;( g∘f )(x)= 1 x+2

f(x)= x+3 2 ,g(x)= 1−x

For the following exercises, find ( f∘g ) and the domain for ( f∘g )(x)
for each pair of functions.

f(x)= x+1 x+4 ,g(x)= 1 x

(f∘g)(x)= 1+x 1+4x , x≠0, x≠− 1 4

f(x)= 1 x+3 ,g(x)= 1 x−9

f(x)= 1 x ,g(x)= x

( f∘g )(x)= 1 x ,x\>0

f(x)= 1 x 2 −1 ,g(x)= x+1

For the following exercises, express each function H as a composition of
two functions f and g where H(x)=(f∘g)(x).

H(x)= 2x−1 3x+4

sample: g(x)= 2x−1 3x+4 ;f(x)= x

H(x)= 1 (3 x 2 −4) −3

## [Transformation of Functions](#) {#eip-id1165134070725}

For the following exercises, sketch a graph of the given function.

f(x)= (x−3) 2

f(x)= (x+4) 3

f(x)= x +5

f(x)=− x 3

f(x)= −x 3

f(x)=5 −x −4

f(x)=4\[ \| x−2 \|−6 \]

f(x)=− (x+2) 2 −1

For the following exercises, sketch the graph of the function g if the
graph of the function f is shown in [\#](#).

<figure id="Figure_01_07_247">

</figure>

g(x)=f(x−1)

g(x)=3f(x)

For the following exercises, write the equation for the standard
function represented by each of the graphs below.

f(x)=\| x−3 \|

For the following exercises, determine whether each function below is
even, odd, or neither.

f(x)=3 x 4

even

g(x)= x

h(x)= 1 x +3x

odd

For the following exercises, analyze the graph and determine whether the
graphed function is even, odd, or neither.

even

## [Absolute Value Functions](#) {#eip-id1165135691363}

For the following exercises, write an equation for the transformation of
f(x)=\| x \|.

f(x)= 1 2 \| x+2 \|+1

f(x)=−3\| x−3 \|+3

For the following exercises, graph the absolute value function.

f(x)=\| x−5 \|

f(x)=−\| x−3 \|

f(x)=\| 2x−4 \|

## [Inverse Functions](#) {#eip-159}

For the following exercises, find f −1 (x) for each function.

f(x)=9+10x

f −1 (x) = x-9 10

f(x)= x x+2

For the following exercise, find a domain on which the function f is
one-to-one and non-decreasing. Write the domain in interval notation.
Then find the inverse of f restricted to that domain.

f(x)= x 2 +1

f −1 (x) = x-1

Given f( x )= x 3 −5 and g(x)= x+5 3 :

ⓐ

Find

f

(

g

(

x

)

)

and

g

(

f

(

x

)

)

.

ⓑ

What does the answer tell us about the relationship between

f

(

x

)

and

g

(

x

)

?

For the following exercises, use a graphing utility to determine whether
each function is one-to-one.

f(x)= 1 x

The function is one-to-one.

f(x)=−3 x 2 +x

If f( 5 )=2, find f −1 (2).

5

If f( 1 )=4, find f −1 (4).

# Practice Test {#fs-id1165137455205}

For the following exercises, determine whether each of the following
relations is a function.

y=2x+8

The relation is a function.

{ (2,1),(3,2),(−1,1),(0,−2) }

For the following exercises, evaluate the function f(x)=−3 x 2 +2x at
the given input.

f(−2)

−16

f(a)

Show that the function f(x)=−2 (x−1) 2 +3 is not one-to-one.

The graph is a parabola and the graph fails the horizontal line test.

Write the domain of the function f(x)= 3−x in interval notation.

Given f(x)=2 x 2 −5x, find f(a+1)−f(1) in simplest form.

2 a 2 −a

Graph the function f(x)={ x+1  if −2\<x\<3   −x   if   x≥3

Find the average rate of change of the function f(x)=3−2 x 2 +x by
finding f(b)−f(a) b−a in simplest form.

−2(a+b)+1

For the following exercises, use the functions f(x)=3−2 x 2 +xand g(x)=
x to find the composite functions.

( g∘f )(x)

( g∘f )(1)

2

Express H(x)= 5 x 2 −3x 3 as a composition of two functions, f and g,
where ( f∘g )(x)=H(x).

For the following exercises, graph the functions by translating,
stretching, and/or compressing a toolkit function.

f(x)= x+6 −1

f(x)= 1 x+2 −1

For the following exercises, determine whether the functions are even,
odd, or neither.

f(x)=− 5 x 2 +9 x 6

even

f(x)=− 5 x 3 +9 x 5

f(x)= 1 x

odd

Graph the absolute value function f(x)=−2\| x−1 \|+3.

For the following exercises, find the inverse of the function.

f(x)=3x−5

f −1 (x)= x+5 3

f(x)= 4 x+7

For the following exercises, use the graph of g shown in [\#](#).

<figure id="Figure_01_07_245">

</figure>

On what intervals is the function increasing?

(−∞,−1.1)and (1.1,∞)

On what intervals is the function decreasing?

Approximate the local minimum of the function. Express the answer as an
ordered pair. The ordered pair should include both the x value as well
as the g(x) value.

( 1.1,−0.9 )

Approximate the local maximum of the function. Express the answer as an
ordered pair. The ordered pair should include both the x value as well
as the g(x) value.

For the following exercises, use the graph of the piecewise function
shown in [\#](#).

<figure id="Figure_01_07_246">

</figure>

Find f(2).

f(2)=2

Find f(−2).

Write an equation for the piecewise function.

f(x)={ \| x \|ifx≤2 3ifx\>2

For the following exercises, use the values listed in [\#](#).

  ------ --- --- --- --- --- ---- ---- ---- ----
  x      0   1   2   3   4   5    6    7    8
  F(x)   1   3   5   7   9   11   13   15   17
  ------ --- --- --- --- --- ---- ---- ---- ----

Find f(6).

Solve the equation f(x)=5.

x=2

Is the graph increasing or decreasing on its domain?

Is the function represented by the graph one-to-one?

yes

Find f −1 (15).

Given f(x)=−2x+11, find f −1 (x).

f −1 (x)=− x−11 2

# 

inverse function

for any one-to-one function

f

(

x

)

,

the inverse is a function

f

−

1

(

x

)

such that

f

−

1

(

f

(

x

)

)

=

x

for all

x

in the domain of

f

;

this also implies that

f

(

f

−

1

(

x

)

)

=

x

for all

x

in the domain of

f

−

1
