m51240

> In this section, you will:
>
> Classify a real number as a natural, whole, integer, rational, or
> irrational number.
>
> Perform calculations using order of operations.
>
> Use the following properties of real numbers: commutative,
> associative, distributive, inverse, and identity.
>
> Evaluate algebraic expressions.
>
> Simplify algebraic expressions.

9d4f1093-3c28-443e-b771-dbe514ae3e5d

<figure id="Figure_01_00_001">

</figure>

It's a cold day in Antarctica. In fact, it's always a cold day in
Antarctica. Earth's southernmost continent, Antarctica experiences the
coldest, driest, and windiest conditions known. The coldest temperature
ever recorded, over one hundred degrees below zero on the Celsius scale,
was recorded by remote satellite. It is no surprise then, that no native
human population can survive the harsh conditions. Only explorers and
scientists brave the environment for any length of time.

Measuring and recording the characteristics of weather conditions in
Antarctica requires a use of different kinds of numbers. For tens of
thousands of years, humans have undertaken methods to tally, track, and
record numerical information. While we don't know much about their
usage, the Lebombo Bone (dated to about 35,000 BCE) and the Ishango Bone
(dated to about 20,000 BCE) are among the earliest mathematical
artifacts. Found in Africa, their clearly deliberate groupings of
notches may have been used to track time, moon cycles, or other
information. Performing calculations with them and using the results to
make predictions requires an understanding of relationships among
numbers. In this chapter, we will review sets of numbers and properties
of operations used to manipulate numbers. This understanding will serve
as prerequisite knowledge throughout our study of algebra and
trigonometry.
