m51239

> In this section, you will:
>
> Classify a real number as a natural, whole, integer, rational, or
> irrational number.
>
> Perform calculations using order of operations.
>
> Use the following properties of real numbers: commutative,
> associative, distributive, inverse, and identity.
>
> Evaluate algebraic expressions.
>
> Simplify algebraic expressions.

d0a86917-6447-4b49-bed1-efb5c352cc77

#  {#eip-845}

## Learning Objectives {#fs-idm348501264}

Identify the study skills leading to success in a college level
mathematics course.

Reflect on your past math experiences and create a plan for improvement.

## Objective 1: Identify the study skills leading to success in a college level mathematics course. {#eip-390}

Welcome to your algebra course! This course will be challenging so now
is the time to set up a plan for success. In this first chapter we will
focus on important strategies for success including: math study skills,
time management, note taking skills, smart test taking strategies, and
the idea of a growth mindset. Each of these ideas will help you to be
successful in your college level math course whether you are enrolled in
a face-to-face traditional section or an online section virtual section.

Complete the following survey by checking a column for each behavior
based on the frequency that you engage in the behavior during your last
academic term.

  Behavior or belief:                                                                                                                                             Always                    Sometimes                    Never
  --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ------------------------- ---------------------------- ------------------------
  1\. Arrive or log in early to class each session.                                                                                                                                                                      
  2\. Stay engaged for the entire class session or online meeting.                                                                                                                                                       
  3\. Contact a fellow student and my instructor if I must miss class for notes or important announcements.                                                                                                              
  4\. Read through my class notes before beginning my homework.                                                                                                                                                          
  5\. Connect with a study partner either virtually or in class.                                                                                                                                                         
  6\. Keep my phone put away during classes to avoid distractions.                                                                                                                                                       
  7\. Spend time on homework each day.                                                                                                                                                                                   
  8\. Begin to review for exams a week prior to exam.                                                                                                                                                                    
  9\. Create a practice test and take it before an exam.                                                                                                                                                                 
  10\. Find my instructor's office hours and stop in either face-to-face or virtually for help.                                                                                                                          
  11\. Locate the math tutoring resources (on campus or virtually) for students and make note of available hours.                                                                                                        
  12\. Visit math tutoring services for assistance on a regular basis (virtual or face-to-face).                                                                                                                         
  13\. Spend at least two hours studying outside of class for each hour in class (virtual or face-to-face).                                                                                                              
  14\. Check my progress in my math course through my college's learning management system.                                                                                                                              
  15\. Scan through my entire test before beginning and start off working on a problem I am confident in solving.                                                                                                        
  16\. Gain access to my math courseware by the end of first week of classes.                                                                                                                                            
  17\. Send an email to my instructor when I need assistance.                                                                                                                                                            
  18\. Create a schedule for each week including time in class, at work and study time.                                                                                                                                  
  19\. Read through my textbook on the section we are covering before I come to class or begin virtual sessions.                                                                                                         
  20\. Feel confident when I start a math exam.                                                                                                                                                                          
  21\. Keep a separate notebook for each class I am taking. Divide math notebooks or binders into separate sections for homework, PowerPoint slides, and notes.                                                          
  22\. Talk honestly about classes with a friend or family member on a regular basis.                                                                                                                                    
  23\. Add test dates to a calendar at the beginning of the semester.                                                                                                                                                    
  24\. Take notes each math class session.                                                                                                                                                                               
  25\. Ask my instructor questions in class (face-to-face or virtual) if I don't understand.                                                                                                                             
  26\. Complete nightly homework assignments.                                                                                                                                                                            
  27\. Engage in class discussions.(virtual or face-to-face)                                                                                                                                                             
  28\. Recopy my class notes more neatly after class.                                                                                                                                                                    
  29\. Have a quiet, organized place to study.                                                                                                                                                                           
  30\. Avoid calls or texts from friends when I'm studying.                                                                                                                                                              
  31\. Set study goals for myself each week.                                                                                                                                                                             
  32\. Think about my academic major and future occupation.                                                                                                                                                              
  33\. Take responsibility for my study plan.                                                                                                                                                                            
  34\. Try different approaches to solve when I get stuck on a problem.                                                                                                                                                  
  35\. Believe that I can be successful in any college math course.                                                                                                                                                      
  36\. Search for instructional videos online when I get really stuck on a section or an exercise.                                                                                                                       
  37\. Create flashcards to help in memorizing important formulas and strategies.                                                                                                                                        
  *Total number in each column:*                                                                                                                                                                                         
  *Scoring:*                                                                                                                                                      *Always: 4 points each*   *Sometimes: 2 points each*   *Never: 0 points each*
  *Total Points:*                                                                                                                                                                                                        *0*

### Practice Makes Perfect {#eip-242}

Identify the study skills leading to success in a college level
mathematics course.

Each of the behaviors or attitudes listed in the table above are
associated with success in college mathematics. This means that students
who use these strategies or are open to these beliefs are successful
learners. Share your total score with your study group in class and be
supportive of your fellow students!

Based on this survey create a list of the top 5 strategies that you
currently utilize, and feel are most helpful to you.

Based on this survey create a list of the *top 5 strategies that
interest you*, and that you feel could be most helpful to you this term.
Plan on implementing these strategies.

## Objective 2: Reflect on your past math experiences and create a plan for improvement. {#eip-869}

It's important to take the opportunity to reflect on your past
experiences in math classes as you begin a new term. We can learn a lot
from these reflections and thus work toward developing a strategy for
improvement.

In the table below list

5 challenges

you had in past math courses and list a possible solution that you could
try this semester.

  Challenge   Possible solution
  ----------- -------------------
  1\.         
  2\.         
  3\.         
  4\.         
  5\.         

Write your math autobiography. Tell your math story by describing your
past experiences as a learner of mathematics. Share how your attitudes
have changed about math over the years if they have. Perhaps include
what you love, hate, dread, appreciate, fear, look forward to, or find
beauty in. This will help your teacher to better understand you and your
current feelings about the discipline.

Share your autobiographies with your study group members. This helps to
create a community in the classroom when common themes emerge.

It is often said that mathematics is the language of science. If this is
true, then an essential part of the language of mathematics is numbers.
The earliest use of numbers occurred 100 centuries ago in the Middle
East to count, or enumerate items. Farmers, cattle herders, and traders
used tokens, stones, or markers to signify a single quantity---a sheaf
of grain, a head of livestock, or a fixed length of cloth, for example.
Doing so made commerce possible, leading to improved communications and
the spread of civilization.

Three to four thousand years ago, Egyptians introduced fractions. They
first used them to show reciprocals. Later, they used them to represent
the amount when a quantity was divided into equal parts.

But what if there were no cattle to trade or an entire crop of grain was
lost in a flood? How could someone indicate the existence of nothing?
From earliest times, people had thought of a "base state" while counting
and used various symbols to represent this null condition. However, it
was not until about the fifth century CE in India that zero was added to
the number system and used as a numeral in calculations.

Clearly, there was also a need for numbers to represent loss or debt. In
India, in the seventh century CE, negative numbers were used as
solutions to mathematical equations and commercial debts. The opposites
of the counting numbers expanded the number system even further.

Because of the evolution of the number system, we can now perform
complex calculations using these and other categories of real numbers.
In this section, we will explore sets of numbers, calculations with
different kinds of numbers, and the use of numbers in expressions.

# Classifying a Real Number {#fs-id2374993}

The numbers we use for counting, or enumerating items, are the natural
numbers: 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, and so on. We describe them in set notation as {
1,2,3,\... } where the ellipsis (...) indicates that the numbers
continue to infinity. The natural numbers are, of course, also called
the *counting numbers*. Any time we enumerate the members of a team,
count the coins in a collection, or tally the trees in a grove, we are
using the set of natural numbers. The set of whole numbers is the set of
natural numbers plus zero: { 0,1,2,3,\... }.

The set of integers adds the opposites of the natural numbers to the set
of whole numbers: { \...,−3,−2,−1,0,1,2,3,\... }. It is useful to note
that the set of integers is made up of three distinct subsets: negative
integers, zero, and positive integers. In this sense, the positive
integers are just the natural numbers. Another way to think about it is
that the natural numbers are a subset of the integers.

$$\begin{array}{lllll}
\overset{\text{negative~integers}}{\overset{}{\ldots,-3,-2,-1,}} & & \overset{\text{zero}}{\overset{}{0,}} & & \overset{\text{positive~integers}}{\overset{}{1,2,3,\cdots}}
\end{array}$$

The set of rational numbers is written as { m n
\|mand nare integers and n≠0 }. Notice from the definition that rational
numbers are fractions (or quotients) containing integers in both the
numerator and the denominator, and the denominator is never 0. We can
also see that every natural number, whole number, and integer is a
rational number with a denominator of 1.

Because they are fractions, any rational number can also be expressed as
a terminating or repeating decimal. Any rational number can be
represented as either:

ⓐ

a terminating decimal:

15

8

=

1.875

,

or

ⓑ

a repeating decimal:

4

11

=

0.36363636

...

=

0\.

36

¯

We use a line drawn over the repeating block of numbers instead of
writing the group multiple times.

::: {#Example_01_01_01 .example}
Write each of the following as a rational number.

ⓐ

7

ⓑ

0

ⓒ

--8

Write a fraction with the integer in the numerator and 1 in the
denominator.

ⓐ

7

=

7

1

ⓑ

0

=

0

1

ⓒ

−8

=

−

8

1
:::

:::: {#fs-id1630610 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Write each of the following as a rational number.

ⓐ

11

ⓑ

3

ⓒ

--4

ⓐ

11

1

ⓑ

3

1

ⓒ

−

4

1
::::

::: {#Example_01_01_02 .example}
Write each of the following rational numbers as either a terminating or
repeating decimal.

ⓐ

−

5

7

ⓑ

15

5

ⓒ

13

25

Write each fraction as a decimal by dividing the numerator by the
denominator.

ⓐ

−

5

7

=

−0.

714285

---------

,

a repeating decimal

ⓑ

15

5

=

3

(or 3.0), a terminating decimal

ⓒ

13

25

=

0.52

,

a terminating decimal
:::

:::: {#fs-id2096882 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Write each of the following rational numbers as either a terminating or
repeating decimal.

ⓐ

68

17

ⓑ

8

13

ⓒ

−

17

20

ⓐ

4 (or 4.0), terminating;

ⓑ

0\.

615384

¯

,

repeating;

ⓒ

--0.85, terminating
::::

## Irrational Numbers {#fs-id2040230}

At some point in the ancient past, someone discovered that not all
numbers are rational numbers. A builder, for instance, may have found
that the diagonal of a square with unit sides was not 2 or even 3 2 ,
but was something else. Or a garment maker might have observed that the
ratio of the circumference to the diameter of a roll of cloth was a
little bit more than 3, but still not a rational number. Such numbers
are said to be *irrational* because they cannot be written as fractions.
These numbers make up the set of irrational numbers. Irrational numbers
cannot be expressed as a fraction of two integers. It is impossible to
describe this set of numbers by a single rule except to say that a
number is irrational if it is not rational. So we write this as shown.

$$\left\{ {\left. h \right|h\mspace{9mu}\text{is~not~a~rational~number}} \right\}$$

::: {#Example_01_01_03 .example}
Determine whether each of the following numbers is rational or
irrational. If it is rational, determine whether it is a terminating or
repeating decimal.

ⓐ

25

ⓑ

33

9

ⓒ

11

ⓓ

17

34

ⓔ

0.3033033303333

...

ⓐ

25

:

This can be simplified as

25

=

5\.

Therefore,

25

is rational.

ⓑ

33

9

:

Because it is a fraction of integers,

33

9

is a rational number. Next, simplify and divide.

$$\frac{33}{9} = \frac{\overset{11}{\cancel{33}}}{\underset{3}{\cancel{9}}} = \frac{11}{3} = 3.\overline{6}$$

So, 33 9 is rational and a repeating decimal.

ⓒ

11

:

11

is irrational because 11 is not a perfect square and

11

cannot be expressed as a fraction.

ⓓ

17

34

:

Because it is a fraction of integers,

17

34

is a rational number. Simplify and divide.

$$\frac{17}{34} = \frac{\overset{1}{\cancel{17}}}{\underset{2}{\cancel{34}}} = \frac{1}{2} = 0.5$$

So, 17 34 is rational and a terminating decimal.

ⓔ

0.3033033303333

...

is not a terminating decimal. Also note that there is no repeating
pattern because the group of 3s increases each time. Therefore it is
neither a terminating nor a repeating decimal and, hence, not a rational
number. It is an irrational number.
:::

:::: {#fs-id2134256 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Determine whether each of the following numbers is rational or
irrational. If it is rational, determine whether it is a terminating or
repeating decimal.

ⓐ

7

77

ⓑ

81

ⓒ

4.27027002700027

...

ⓓ

91

13

ⓔ

39

ⓐ

rational and repeating;

ⓑ

rational and terminating;

ⓒ

irrational;

ⓓ

rational and terminating;

ⓔ

irrational
::::

## Real Numbers {#fs-id1598961}

Given any number *n*, we know that *n* is either rational or irrational.
It cannot be both. The sets of rational and irrational numbers together
make up the set of real numbers. As we saw with integers, the real
numbers can be divided into three subsets: negative real numbers, zero,
and positive real numbers. Negative and positive real numbers include
fractions, decimals, and irrational numbers according to their algebraic
sign (+ or --). Zero is considered neither positive nor negative.

The real numbers can be visualized on a horizontal number line with an
arbitrary point chosen as 0, with negative numbers to the left of 0 and
positive numbers to the right of 0. A fixed unit distance is then used
to mark off each integer (or other basic value) on either side of 0. Any
real number corresponds to a unique position on the number line.The
converse is also true: Each location on the number line corresponds to
exactly one real number. This is known as a one-to-one correspondence.
We refer to this as the real number line as shown in [\#](#)*.*

<figure id="Figure_01_01_001">

</figure>

::: {#Example_01_01_04 .example}
Classify each number as either positive or negative and as either
rational or irrational. Does the number lie to the left or the right of
0 on the number line?

ⓐ

−

10

3

ⓑ

5

ⓒ

−

289

ⓓ

−6

π

ⓔ

0.615384615384

...

ⓐ

−

10

3

is negative and rational. It lies to the left of 0 on the number line.

ⓑ

5

is positive and irrational. It lies to the right of 0.

ⓒ

−

289

=

−

17

2

=

−17

is negative and rational. It lies to the left of 0.

ⓓ

−6

π

is negative and irrational. It lies to the left of 0.

ⓔ

0.615384615384

...

is a repeating decimal so it is rational and positive. It lies to the
right of 0.
:::

:::: {#fs-id2489621 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Classify each number as either positive or negative and as either
rational or irrational. Does the number lie to the left or the right of
0 on the number line?

ⓐ

73

ⓑ

−11.411411411

...

ⓒ

47

19

ⓓ

−

5

2

ⓔ

6.210735

ⓐ

positive, irrational; right

ⓑ

negative, rational; left

ⓒ

positive, rational; right

ⓓ

negative, irrational; left

ⓔ

positive, rational; right
::::

## Sets of Numbers as Subsets {#fs-id1687126}

Beginning with the natural numbers, we have expanded each set to form a
larger set, meaning that there is a subset relationship between the sets
of numbers we have encountered so far. These relationships become more
obvious when seen as a diagram, such as [\#](#).

<figure id="Figure_01_01_002">

</figure>

:::: {#fs-id931589 .note}
::: title
Sets of Numbers
:::

The set of natural numbers includes the numbers used for counting: {
1,2,3,\... }.

The set of whole numbers is the set of natural numbers plus zero: {
0,1,2,3,\... }.

The set of integers adds the negative natural numbers to the set of
whole numbers: { \...,−3,−2,−1,0,1,2,3,\... }.

The set of rational numbers includes fractions written as { m n
\|mand nare integers and n≠0 }.

The set of irrational numbers is the set of numbers that are not
rational, are nonrepeating, and are nonterminating: {
h\|his not a rational number }.
::::

::: {#Example_01_01_05 .example}
Classify each number as being a natural number (*N*), whole number
(*W*), integer (*I*), rational number (*Q*), and/or irrational number
(*Q′*).

ⓐ

36

ⓑ

8

3

ⓒ

73

ⓓ

−6

ⓔ

3.2121121112

...

                         *N*   *W*   *I*   *Q*   *Q′*
  ---------------------- ----- ----- ----- ----- ------
  a\. 36 =6              X     X     X     X     
  b\. 8 3 =2. 6 ¯                          X     
  c\. 73                                         X
  d\. --6                            X     X     
  e\. 3.2121121112\...                           X
:::

:::: {#fs-id2529674 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Classify each number as being a natural number (*N*), whole number
(*W*), integer (*I*), rational number (*Q*), and/or irrational number
(*Q′*).

ⓐ

−

35

7

ⓑ

0

ⓒ

169

ⓓ

24

ⓔ

4.763763763

...

                        *N*   *W*   *I*   *Q*   *Q\'*
  --------------------- ----- ----- ----- ----- -------
  a\. − 35 7                        X     X     
  b\. 0                       X     X     X     
  c\. 169               X     X     X     X     
  d\. 24                                        X
  e\. 4.763763763\...                     X     
::::

# Performing Calculations Using the Order of Operations {#fs-id3574670}

When we multiply a number by itself, we square it or raise it to a power
of 2. For example, 4 2 =4⋅4=16. We can raise any number to any power. In
general, the exponential notation a n means that the number or variable
a is used as a factor n times.

$$\begin{array}{l}
a^{n}
\end{array} = \overset{n\mspace{9mu}\text{factors}}{\overset{}{a \cdot a \cdot a \cdot \ldots \cdot a}}$$

In this notation, a n is read as the *n*th power of a, or a to the n
where a is called the base and n is called the exponent*.* A term in
exponential notation may be part of a mathematical expression, which is
a combination of numbers and operators, i.e., + addition, --
subtraction, × multiplication, ÷ division. For example, 24+6⋅ 2 3 − 4 2
is a mathematical expression.

To evaluate a mathematical expression, we perform the various
operations. However, we do not perform them in any random order. We use
the order of operations. This is a sequence of rules for evaluating such
expressions.

Recall that in mathematics we use parentheses ( ), brackets \[ \], and
braces { } to group numbers and expressions so that anything appearing
within the symbols is treated as a unit. Additionally, fraction bars,
radicals, and absolute value bars are treated as grouping symbols. When
evaluating a mathematical expression, begin by simplifying expressions
within grouping symbols.

The next step is to address any exponents or radicals. Afterward,
perform multiplication and division from left to right and finally
addition and subtraction from left to right.

Let's take a look at the expression provided.

$$24 + 6 \cdot \frac{2}{3} - 4^{2}$$

There are no grouping symbols, so we move on to exponents or radicals.
The number 4 is raised to a power of 2, so simplify 4 2 as 16.

$$\begin{array}{l}
 \\
\begin{array}{l}
{24 + 6 \cdot \frac{2}{3} - 4^{2}} \\
{24 + 6 \cdot \frac{2}{3} - 16}
\end{array}
\end{array}$$

Next, perform multiplication or division, left to right.

$$\begin{array}{l}
 \\
\begin{array}{l}
{24 + 6 \cdot \frac{2}{3} - 16} \\
{24 + 4 - 16}
\end{array}
\end{array}$$

Lastly, perform addition or subtraction, left to right.

$$\begin{array}{l}
 \\
{24 + 4 - 16} \\
{\mspace{9mu} 28 - 16} \\
{\mspace{9mu} 12}
\end{array}$$

Therefore, 24+6⋅ 2 3 − 4 2 =12.

For some complicated expressions, several passes through the order of
operations will be needed. For instance, there may be a radical
expression inside parentheses that must be simplified before the
parentheses are evaluated. Following the order of operations ensures
that anyone simplifying the same mathematical expression will get the
same result.

:::: {#fs-id1342923 .note}
::: title
Order of Operations
:::

Operations in mathematical expressions must be evaluated in a systematic
order, which can be simplified using the acronym *PEMDAS*:

*P*(arentheses)*E*(xponents)*M*(ultiplication) and
*D*(ivision)*A*(ddition) and *S*(ubtraction)
::::

:::: {#fs-id1545011 .note}
::: title
:::

How To

*Given a mathematical expression, simplify it using the order of
operations.*

Simplify any expressions within grouping symbols.

Simplify any expressions containing exponents or radicals.

Perform any multiplication and division in order, from left to right.

Perform any addition and subtraction in order, from left to right.
::::

::: {#Example_01_01_06 .example}
Use the order of operations to evaluate each of the following
expressions.

ⓐ

(

3

⋅

2

)

2

−

4

(

6

\+

2

)

ⓑ

5

2

−

4

7

−

11

−

2

ⓒ

6

−

\|

5

−

8

\|

\+

3

(

4

−

1

)

ⓓ

14

−

3

⋅

2

2

⋅

5

−

3

2

ⓔ

7

(

5

⋅

3

)

−

2

\[

(

6

−

3

)

−

4

2

\]

\+

1

ⓐ

(

3

⋅

2

)

2

−

4

(

6

\+

2

)

=

(

6

)

2

−

4

(

8

)

Simplify parentheses.

=

36

−

4

(

8

)

Simplify exponent.

=

36

−

32

Simplify multiplication.

=

4

Simplify subtraction.

ⓑ

5

2

\-

4

7

−

11

−

2

=

5

2

−

4

7

−

9

Simplify grouping symbols (radical).

=

5

2

−

4

7

−

3

Simplify radical.

=

25

−

4

7

−

3

Simplify exponent.

=

21

7

−

3

Simplify subtraction in numerator.

=

3

−

3

Simplify division.

=

0

Simplify subtraction.

Note that in the first step, the radical is treated as a grouping
symbol, like parentheses. Also, in the third step, the fraction bar is
considered a grouping symbol so the numerator is considered to be
grouped.

ⓒ

6

−

\|

5

−

8

\|

\+

3

\|

4

−

1

\|

=

6

−

\|

−3

\|

\+

3

(

3

)

Simplify inside grouping symbols.

=

6

\-

(

3

)

\+

3

(

3

)

Simplify absolute value.

=

6

\-

3

\+

9

Simplify multiplication.

=

12

Simplify addition.

ⓓ

14

−

3

⋅

2

2

⋅

5

−

3

2

=

14

−

3

⋅

2

2

⋅

5

−

9

Simplify exponent.

=

14

−

6

10

−

9

Simplify products.

=

8

1

Simplify differences.

=

8

Simplify quotient.

In this example, the fraction bar separates the numerator and
denominator, which we simplify separately until the last step.

ⓔ

7

(

5

⋅

3

)

−

2

\[

(

6

−

3

)

−

4

2

\]

\+

1

=

7

(

15

)

−

2

\[

(

3

)

−

4

2

\]

\+

1

Simplify inside parentheses.

=

7

(

15

)

−

2

(

3

−

16

)

\+

1

Simplify exponent.

=

7

(

15

)

−

2

(

−13

)

\+

1

Subtract.

=

105

\+

26

\+

1

Multiply.

=

132

Add.
:::

:::: {#fs-id2261204 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Use the order of operations to evaluate each of the following
expressions.

ⓐ

5

2

−

4

2

\+

7

(

5

−

4

)

2

ⓑ

1

\+

7

⋅

5

−

8

⋅

4

9

−

6

ⓒ

\|

1.8

−

4.3

\|

\+

0.4

15

\+

10

ⓓ

1

2

\[

5

⋅

3

2

−

7

2

\]

\+

1

3

⋅

9

2

ⓔ

\[

(

3

−

8

)

2

−

4

\]

−

(

3

−

8

)

ⓐ

10

ⓑ

2

ⓒ

4.5

ⓓ

25

ⓔ

26
::::

# Using Properties of Real Numbers {#fs-id2783853}

For some activities we perform, the order of certain operations does not
matter, but the order of other operations does. For example, it does not
make a difference if we put on the right shoe before the left or
vice-versa. However, it does matter whether we put on shoes or socks
first. The same thing is true for operations in mathematics.

##  {#fs-id3578887}

### Commutative Properties {#fs-id3578889}

The commutative property of addition states that numbers may be added in
any order without affecting the sum.

$$a + b = b + a$$

We can better see this relationship when using real numbers.

$$\begin{array}{lllll}
{(-2) + 7 = 5} & & \text{and} & & {7 + (-2) = 5}
\end{array}$$

Similarly, the commutative property of multiplication states that
numbers may be multiplied in any order without affecting the product.

$$a \cdot b = b \cdot a$$

Again, consider an example with real numbers.

$$\begin{matrix}
{(-11) \cdot (-4) = 44} & & \text{and} & & {(-4) \cdot (-11) = 44}
\end{matrix}$$

It is important to note that neither subtraction nor division is
commutative. For example, 17−5 is not the same as 5−17. Similarly,
20÷5≠5÷20.

### Associative Properties {#fs-id1618548}

The associative property of multiplication tells us that it does not
matter how we group numbers when multiplying. We can move the grouping
symbols to make the calculation easier, and the product remains the
same.

$$a\left( {bc} \right) = \left( {ab} \right)c$$

Consider this example.

$$\begin{matrix}
{\left( {3 \cdot 4} \right) \cdot 5 = 60} & & \text{and} & & {3 \cdot \left( {4 \cdot 5} \right) = 60}
\end{matrix}$$

The associative property of addition tells us that numbers may be
grouped differently without affecting the sum.

$$a + \left( {b + c} \right) = \left( {a + b} \right) + c$$

This property can be especially helpful when dealing with negative
integers. Consider this example.

$$\begin{matrix}
{\left\lbrack {15 + (-9)} \right\rbrack + 23 = 29} & & \text{and} & & {15 + \left\lbrack {(-9) + 23} \right\rbrack = 29}
\end{matrix}$$

Are subtraction and division associative? Review these examples.

$$\begin{array}{rclrcl}
{8 - (3 - 15)} & \overset{?}{=} & {(8 - 3) - 15} & {\qquad 64 \div (8 \div 4)} & \overset{?}{=} & {(64 \div 8) \div 4} \\
{8 - ( - 12)} & = & {5 - 15} & {\qquad\mspace{9mu} 64 \div 2} & \overset{?}{=} & {\mspace{9mu} 8 \div 4} \\
20 & \neq & {- 10} & {\qquad\mspace{9mu} 32} & \neq & 2
\end{array}$$

As we can see, neither subtraction nor division is associative.

### Distributive Property {#fs-id1705288}

The distributive property states that the product of a factor times a
sum is the sum of the factor times each term in the sum.

$$a \cdot \left( {b + c} \right) = a \cdot b + a \cdot c$$

This property combines both addition and multiplication (and is the only
property to do so). Let us consider an example.

Note that 4 is outside the grouping symbols, so we distribute the 4 by
multiplying it by 12, multiplying it by --7, and adding the products.

To be more precise when describing this property, we say that
multiplication distributes over addition. The reverse is not true, as we
can see in this example.

$$\begin{array}{rcl}
{6 + (3 \cdot 5)} & \overset{?}{=} & {(6 + 3) \cdot (6 + 5)} \\
{6 + (15)} & \overset{?}{=} & {(9) \cdot (11)} \\
21 & \neq & {\mspace{9mu} 99}
\end{array}$$

A special case of the distributive property occurs when a sum of terms
is subtracted.

$$a - b = a + \left( {- b} \right)$$

For example, consider the difference 12−( 5+3 ). We can rewrite the
difference of the two terms 12 and ( 5+3 ) by turning the subtraction
expression into addition of the opposite. So instead of subtracting (
5+3 ), we add the opposite.

$$12 + (-1) \cdot \left( {5 + 3} \right)$$

Now, distribute −1 and simplify the result.

$$\begin{array}{cll}
{12 - (5 + 3)} & = & {12 + (-1) \cdot (5 + 3)} \\
 & = & {12 + \lbrack(-1) \cdot 5 + (-1) \cdot 3\rbrack} \\
 & = & {12 + (-8)} \\
 & = & 4
\end{array}$$

This seems like a lot of trouble for a simple sum, but it illustrates a
powerful result that will be useful once we introduce algebraic terms.
To subtract a sum of terms, change the sign of each term and add the
results. With this in mind, we can rewrite the last example.

$$\begin{matrix}
{12 - (5 + 3)} & = & {12 + (-5 - 3)} \\
 & = & {12 + (-8)} \\
 & = & 4
\end{matrix}$$

### Identity Properties {#fs-id2165198}

The identity property of addition states that there is a unique number,
called the additive identity (0) that, when added to a number, results
in the original number.

$$a + 0 = a$$

The identity property of multiplication states that there is a unique
number, called the multiplicative identity (1) that, when multiplied by
a number, results in the original number.

$$a \cdot 1 = a$$

For example, we have ( −6 )+0=−6 and 23⋅1=23. There are no exceptions
for these properties; they work for every real number, including 0 and
1.

### Inverse Properties {#fs-id2591971}

The inverse property of addition states that, for every real number *a*,
there is a unique number, called the additive inverse (or opposite),
denoted by (−*a*), that, when added to the original number, results in
the additive identity, 0.

$$a + \left( {- a} \right) = 0$$

For example, if a=−8, the additive inverse is 8, since ( −8 )+8=0.

The inverse property of multiplication holds for all real numbers except
0 because the reciprocal of 0 is not defined. The property states that,
for every real number *a*, there is a unique number, called the
multiplicative inverse (or reciprocal), denoted 1 a , that, when
multiplied by the original number, results in the multiplicative
identity, 1.

$$a \cdot \frac{1}{a} = 1$$

For example, if a=− 2 3 , the reciprocal, denoted 1 a , is − 3 2 because

$$a \cdot \frac{1}{a} = \left( {- \frac{2}{3}} \right) \cdot \left( {- \frac{3}{2}} \right) = 1$$

:::: {#fs-id2686639 .note}
::: title
Properties of Real Numbers
:::

The following properties hold for real numbers *a*, *b*, and *c*.

+----------------------+----------------------------------+--------------------------------------------+
|                      | Addition                         | Multiplication                             |
+======================+==================================+============================================+
| *Commutative         | a+b=b+a                          | a⋅b=b⋅a                                    |
| Property*            |                                  |                                            |
+----------------------+----------------------------------+--------------------------------------------+
| *Associative         | a+( b+c )=( a+b )+c              | a( bc )=( ab )c                            |
| Property*            |                                  |                                            |
+----------------------+----------------------------------+--------------------------------------------+
| *Distributive        | a⋅( b+c )=a⋅b+a⋅c                                                             |
| Property*            |                                                                               |
+----------------------+----------------------------------+--------------------------------------------+
| *Identity Property*  | There exists a unique real       | There exists a unique real number called   |
|                      | number called the additive       | the multiplicative identity, 1, such that, |
|                      | identity, 0, such that, for any  | for any real number *a* $$a \cdot 1 = a$$  |
|                      | real number *a* $$a + 0 = a$$    |                                            |
+----------------------+----------------------------------+--------------------------------------------+
| *Inverse Property*   | Every real number a has an       | Every nonzero real number *a* has a        |
|                      | additive inverse, or opposite,   | multiplicative inverse, or reciprocal,     |
|                      | denoted *--a*, such that         | denoted 1 a , such that                    |
|                      | $$a + \left( {- a} \right) = 0$$ | $$a \cdot \left( \frac{1}{a} \right) = 1$$ |
+----------------------+----------------------------------+--------------------------------------------+
::::

::: {#Example_01_01_07 .example}
Use the properties of real numbers to rewrite and simplify each
expression. State which properties apply.

ⓐ

3

⋅

6

\+

3

⋅

4

ⓑ

(

5

\+

8

)

\+

(

−8

)

ⓒ

6

−

(

15

\+

9

)

ⓓ

4

7

⋅

(

2

3

⋅

7

4

)

ⓔ

100

⋅

\[

0.75

\+

(

−2.38

)

\]

ⓐ

3

⋅

6

\+

3

⋅

4

=

3

⋅

(

6

\+

4

)

Distributive property.

=

3

⋅

10

Simplify.

=

30

Simplify.

ⓑ

(

5

\+

8

)

\+

(

−8

)

=

5

\+

\[

8

\+

(

−8

)

\]

Associative property of addition.

=

5

\+

0

Inverse property of addition.

=

5

Identity property of addition.

ⓒ

6

−

(

15

\+

9

)

=

6

\+

\[

(

−15

)

\+

(

−9

)

\]

Distributive property.

=

6

\+

(

−24

)

Simplify.

=

−18

Simplify.

ⓓ

4

7

⋅

(

2

3

⋅

7

4

)

=

4

7

⋅

(

7

4

⋅

2

3

)

Commutative property of multiplication.

=

(

4

7

⋅

7

4

)

⋅

2

3

Associative property of multiplication.

=

1

⋅

2

3

Inverse property of multiplication.

=

2

3

Identity property of multiplication.

ⓔ

100

⋅

\[

0.75

\+

(

−

2.38

)

\]

=

100

⋅

0.75

\+

100

⋅

(

−2.38

)

Distributive property.

=

75

\+

(

−238

)

Simplify.

=

−163

Simplify.
:::

:::: {#fs-id2819909 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Use the properties of real numbers to rewrite and simplify each
expression. State which properties apply.

ⓐ

(

−

23

5

)

⋅

\[

11

⋅

(

−

5

23

)

\]

ⓑ

5

⋅

(

6.2

\+

0.4

)

ⓒ

18

−

(

7

−15

)

ⓓ

17

18

\+

\[

4

9

\+

(

−

17

18

)

\]

ⓔ

6

⋅

(

−3

)

\+

6

⋅

3

ⓐ

11, commutative property of multiplication, associative property of
multiplication, inverse property of multiplication, identity property of
multiplication;

ⓑ

33, distributive property;

ⓒ

26, distributive property;

ⓓ

4

9

,

commutative property of addition, associative property of addition,
inverse property of addition, identity property of addition;

ⓔ

0, distributive property, inverse property of addition
::::

## Evaluating Algebraic Expressions {#fs-id2146838}

So far, the mathematical expressions we have seen have involved real
numbers only. In mathematics, we may see expressions such as x+5, 4 3 π
r 3 , or 2 m 3 n 2 . In the expression x+5, 5 is called a constant
because it does not vary and *x* is called a variable because it does.
(In naming the variable, ignore any exponents or radicals containing the
variable.) An algebraic expression is a collection of constants and
variables joined together by the algebraic operations of addition,
subtraction, multiplication, and division.

We have already seen some real number examples of exponential notation,
a shorthand method of writing products of the same factor. When
variables are used, the constants and variables are treated the same
way.

$$\begin{array}{rclrcl}
{(-3)}^{5} & = & {(-3) \cdot (-3) \cdot (-3) \cdot (-3) \cdot (-3)} & x^{5} & = & {x \cdot x \cdot x \cdot x \cdot x} \\
{(2 \cdot 7)}^{3} & = & {(2 \cdot 7) \cdot (2 \cdot 7) \cdot (2 \cdot 7)} & {\mspace{9mu}{(yz)}^{3}} & = & {(yz) \cdot (yz) \cdot (yz)}
\end{array}$$

In each case, the exponent tells us how many factors of the base to use,
whether the base consists of constants or variables.

Any variable in an algebraic expression may take on or be assigned
different values. When that happens, the value of the algebraic
expression changes. To evaluate an algebraic expression means to
determine the value of the expression for a given value of each variable
in the expression. Replace each variable in the expression with the
given value, then simplify the resulting expression using the order of
operations. If the algebraic expression contains more than one variable,
replace each variable with its assigned value and simplify the
expression as before.

::: {#Example_01_01_08 .example}
List the constants and variables for each algebraic expression.

ⓐ

x

\+ 5

ⓑ

4

3

π

r

3

ⓒ

2

m

3

n

2

                  Constants   Variables
  --------------- ----------- -----------
  a\. *x* + 5     5           *x*
  b\. 4 3 π r 3   4 3 ,π      r
  c\. 2 m 3 n 2   2           m,n
:::

:::: {#fs-id1459253 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

List the constants and variables for each algebraic expression.

ⓐ

2

π

r

(

r

\+

h

)

ⓑ

2(

L

\+

W

)

ⓒ

4

y

3

\+

y

                   Constants   Variables
  ---------------- ----------- -----------
  a\. 2πr( r+h )   2,π         r,h
  b\. 2(L + W)     2           L, W
  c\. 4 y 3 +y     4           y
::::

::: {#Example_01_01_09 .example}
Evaluate the expression 2x−7 for each value for *x.*

ⓐ

x

=

0

ⓑ

x

=

1

ⓒ

x

=

1

2

ⓓ

x

=

−4

ⓐ

Substitute 0 for

x

.

$$\begin{matrix}
{2x - 7} & = & {2(0) - 7} \\
 & = & {0 - 7} \\
 & = & -7
\end{matrix}$$

ⓑ

Substitute 1 for

x

.

$$\begin{array}{ccl}
{2x - 7} & = & {2(1) - 7} \\
 & = & {2 - 7} \\
 & = & -5
\end{array}$$

ⓒ

Substitute

1

2

for

x

.

$$\begin{array}{ccl}
{2x - 7} & = & {2\left( \frac{1}{2} \right) - 7} \\
 & = & {1 - 7} \\
 & = & -6
\end{array}$$

ⓓ

Substitute

−4

for

x

.

$$\begin{matrix}
{2x - 7} & = & {2( - 4) - 7} \\
 & = & {- 8 - 7} \\
 & = & -15
\end{matrix}$$
:::

:::: {#fs-id2989790 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Evaluate the expression 11−3y for each value for *y.*

ⓐ

y

=

2

ⓑ

y

=

0

ⓒ

y

=

2

3

ⓓ

y

=

−5

ⓐ

5;

ⓑ

11;

ⓒ

9;

ⓓ

26
::::

::: {#Example_01_01_10 .example}
Evaluate each expression for the given values.

ⓐ

x

\+

5

for

x

=

−5

ⓑ

t

2

t

−1

for

t

=

10

ⓒ

4

3

π

r

3

for

r

=

5

ⓓ

a

\+

a

b

\+

b

for

a

=

11

,

b

=

−8

ⓔ

2

m

3

n

2

for

m

=

2

,

n

=

3

ⓐ

Substitute

−5

for

x

.

$$\begin{array}{ccl}
{x + 5} & = & {(-5) + 5} \\
 & = & 0
\end{array}$$

ⓑ

Substitute 10 for

t

.

$$\begin{array}{ccl}
\frac{t}{2t - 1} & = & \frac{(10)}{2(10) - 1} \\
 & = & \frac{10}{20 - 1} \\
 & = & \frac{10}{19}
\end{array}$$

ⓒ

Substitute 5 for

r

.

$$\begin{matrix}
{\frac{4}{3}\pi r^{3}} & = & {\frac{4}{3}\pi{(5)}^{3}} \\
 & = & {\frac{4}{3}\pi(125)} \\
 & = & {\frac{500}{3}\pi}
\end{matrix}$$

ⓓ

Substitute 11 for

a

and --8 for

b

.

$$\begin{matrix}
{a + ab + b} & = & {(11) + (11)(-8) + (-8)} \\
 & = & {11 - 88 - 8} \\
 & = & -85
\end{matrix}$$

ⓔ

Substitute 2 for

m

and 3 for

n

.

$$\begin{array}{ccl}
\sqrt{2m^{3}n^{2}} & = & \sqrt{2{(2)}^{3}{(3)}^{2}} \\
 & = & \sqrt{2(8)(9)} \\
 & = & \sqrt{144} \\
 & = & 12
\end{array}$$
:::

:::: {#fs-id3636122 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Evaluate each expression for the given values.

ⓐ

y

\+

3

y

−

3

for

y

=

5

ⓑ

7

−

2

t

for

t

=

−2

ⓒ

1

3

π

r

2

for

r

=

11

ⓓ

(

p

2

q

)

3

for

p

=

−2

,

q

=

3

ⓔ

4

(

m

−

n

)

−

5

(

n

−

m

)

for

m

=

2

3

,

n

=

1

3

ⓐ

4;

ⓑ

11;

ⓒ

121

3

π

;

ⓓ

1728;

ⓔ

3
::::

## Formulas {#fs-id3660280}

An equation is a mathematical statement indicating that two expressions
are equal. The expressions can be numerical or algebraic. The equation
is not inherently true or false, but only a proposition. The values that
make the equation true, the solutions, are found using the properties of
real numbers and other results. For example, the equation 2x+1=7 has the
solution of 3 because when we substitute 3 for x in the equation, we
obtain the true statement 2( 3 )+1=7.

A formula is an equation expressing a relationship between constant and
variable quantities. Very often, the equation is a means of finding the
value of one quantity (often a single variable) in terms of another or
other quantities. One of the most common examples is the formula for
finding the area A of a circle in terms of the radius r of the circle:
A=π r 2 . For any value of r, the area A can be found by evaluating the
expression π r 2 .

::: {#Example_01_01_11 .example}
A right circular cylinder with radius r and height h has the surface
area S (in square units) given by the formula S=2πr( r+h ). See [\#](#).
Find the surface area of a cylinder with radius 6 in. and height 9 in.
Leave the answer in terms of π.

<figure id="Figure_01_01_004">

</figure>

Evaluate the expression 2πr( r+h ) for r=6 and h=9.

$$\begin{array}{ccl}
S & = & {2\pi r(r + h)} \\
 & = & {2\pi(6)\lbrack(6) + (9)\rbrack} \\
 & = & {2\pi(6)(15)} \\
 & = & {180\pi}
\end{array}$$

The surface area is 180π square inches.
:::

:::: {#fs-id1862095 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

A photograph with length *L* and width *W* is placed in a mat of width 8
centimeters (cm). The area of the mat (in square centimeters, or cm2) is
found to be A=( L+16 )( W+16 )−L⋅W. See [\#](#). Find the area of a mat
for a photograph with length 32 cm and width 24 cm.

<figure id="Figure_01_01_005">

</figure>

1,152 cm2
::::

## Simplifying Algebraic Expressions {#fs-id2193236}

Sometimes we can simplify an algebraic expression to make it easier to
evaluate or to use in some other way. To do so, we use the properties of
real numbers. We can use the same properties in formulas because they
contain algebraic expressions.

::: {#Example_01_01_12 .example}
Simplify each algebraic expression.

ⓐ

3

x

−

2

y

\+

x

−

3

y

−

7

ⓑ

2

r

−

5

(

3

−

r

)

\+

4

ⓒ

(

4

t

−

5

4

s

)

−

(

2

3

t

\+

2

s

)

ⓓ

2

m

n

−

5

m

\+

3

m

n

\+

n

ⓐ

3

x

−

2

y

\+

x

−

3

y

−

7

=

3

x

\+

x

−

2

y

−

3

y

−

7

Commutative property of addition.

=

4

x

−

5

y

−

7

Simplify.

ⓑ

2

r

−

5

(

3

−

r

)

\+

4

=

2

r

−

15

\+

5

r

\+

4

Distributive property.

=

2

r

\+

5

r

−

15

\+

4

Commutative property of addition.

=

7

r

−

11

Simplify.

ⓒ

(

4

t

−

5

4

s

)

−

(

2

3

t

\+

2

s

)

=

4

t

−

5

4

s

−

2

3

t

−

2

s

Distributive property.

=

4

t

−

2

3

t

−

5

4

s

−

2

s

Commutative property of addition.

=

10

3

t

−

13

4

s

Simplify.

ⓓ

2

m

n

−

5

m

\+

3

m

n

\+

n

=

2

m

n

\+

3

m

n

−

5

m

\+

n

Commutative property of addition.

=

5

m

n

−

5

m

\+

n

Simplify.
:::

:::: {#fs-id1862621 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Simplify each algebraic expression.

ⓐ

2

3

y

−

2

(

4

3

y

\+

z

)

ⓑ

5

t

−

2

−

3

t

\+

1

ⓒ

4

p

(

q

−

1

)

\+

q

(

1

−

p

)

ⓓ

9

r

−

(

s

\+

2

r

)

\+

(

6

−

s

)

ⓐ

−2

y

−2

z

or 

−2

(

y

\+

z

)

;

ⓑ

2

t

−1

;

ⓒ

3

p

q

−4

p

\+

q

;

ⓓ

7

r

−2

s

\+

6
::::

::: {#Example_01_01_13 .example}
A rectangle with length L and width W has a perimeter P given by
P=L+W+L+W. Simplify this expression.

$$\begin{array}{rclc}
P & = & {L + W + L + W} & \\
P & = & {L + L + W + W} & {\qquad\text{Commutative~property~of~addition}} \\
P & = & {2L + 2W} & {\qquad\text{Simplify}} \\
P & = & {2\left( {L + W} \right)} & {\qquad\text{Distributive~property}}
\end{array}$$
:::

:::: {#fs-id2170279 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

If the amount P is deposited into an account paying simple interest r
for time t, the total value of the deposit A is given by A=P+Prt.
Simplify the expression. (This formula will be explored in more detail
later in the course.)

A=P( 1+rt )
::::

:::: {#fs-id2721655 .note}
::: title
:::

Media

Access these online resources for additional instruction and practice
with real numbers.

Simplify an Expression.

Evaluate an Expression 1.

Evaluate an Expression 2.
::::

# Key Concepts {#fs-id2691543}

Rational numbers may be written as fractions or terminating or repeating
decimals. See

and

.

Determine whether a number is rational or irrational by writing it as a
decimal. See

.

The rational numbers and irrational numbers make up the set of real
numbers. See

. A number can be classified as natural, whole, integer, rational, or
irrational. See

.

The order of operations is used to evaluate expressions. See

.

The real numbers under the operations of addition and multiplication
obey basic rules, known as the properties of real numbers. These are the
commutative properties, the associative properties, the distributive
property, the identity properties, and the inverse properties. See

.

Algebraic expressions are composed of constants and variables that are
combined using addition, subtraction, multiplication, and division. See

. They take on a numerical value when evaluated by replacing variables
with constants. See

,

, and

Formulas are equations in which one quantity is represented in terms of
other quantities. They may be simplified or evaluated as any
mathematical expression. See

and

.

# Section Exercises {#fs-id3300486}

## Verbal {#fs-id2542028}

Is 2 an example of a rational terminating, rational repeating, or
irrational number? Tell why it fits that category.

irrational number. The square root of two does not terminate, and it
does not repeat a pattern. It cannot be written as a quotient of two
integers, so it is irrational.

What is the order of operations? What acronym is used to describe the
order of operations, and what does it stand for?

What do the Associative Properties allow us to do when following the
order of operations? Explain your answer.

The Associative Properties state that the sum or product of multiple
numbers can be grouped differently without affecting the result. This is
because the same operation is performed (either addition or
subtraction), so the terms can be re-ordered.

## Numeric {#fs-id1571756}

For the following exercises, simplify the given expression.

10+2×( 5−3 )

6÷2−( 81÷ 3 2 )

−6

18+ ( 6−8 ) 3

−2× \[ 16÷ ( 8−4 ) 2 \] 2

−2

4−6+2×7

3( 5−8 )

−9

4+6−10÷2

12÷( 36÷9 )+6

9

( 4+5 ) 2 ÷3

3−12×2+19

-2

2+8×7÷4

5+( 6+4 )−11

4

9−18÷ 3 2

14×3÷7−6

0

9−( 3+11 )×2

6+2×2−1

9

64÷( 8+4×2 )

9+4( 2 2 )

25

( 12÷3×3 ) 2

25÷ 5 2 −7

−6

( 15−7 )×( 3−7 )

2×4−9( −1 )

17

4 2 −25× 1 5

12( 3−1 )÷6

4

## Algebraic {#fs-id1373736}

For the following exercises, evaluate the expression using the given
value of the variable.

8( x+3 )--64 for x=2

4y+8--2y for y=3

14

( 11a+3 )−18a+4 for a=--2

4z−2z( 1+4 )--36 for z=5

−66

4y ( 7−2 ) 2 +200 for y=--2

− ( 2x ) 2 +1+3 for x=2

--12

8( 2+4 )−15b+b for b=--3

2( 11c−4 )--36 for c=0

--44

4( 3−1 )x--4 for x=10

1 4 ( 8w− 4 2 ) for w=1

--2

For the following exercises, simplify the expression.

4x+x( 13−7 )

2y− ( 4 ) 2 y−11

−14y−11

a 2 3 ( 64 )−12a÷6

8b−4b( 3 )+1

−4b+1

5l÷3l×( 9−6 )

7z−3+z× 6 2

43z−3

4×3+18x÷9−12

9( y+8 )−27

9y+45

( 9 6 t−4 )2

6+12b−3×6b

−6b+6

18y−2( 1+7y )

( 4 9 ) 2 ×27x

16x 3

8( 3−m )+1( −8 )

9x+4x( 2+3 )−4( 2x+3x )

9x

5 2 −4( 3x )

## Real-World Applications {#fs-id2098225}

For the following exercises, consider this scenario: Fred earns \$40 at
the community garden. He spends \$10 on a streaming subscription, puts
half of what is left in a savings account, and gets another \$5 for
walking his neighbor's dog.

Write the expression that represents the number of dollars Fred keeps
(and does not put in his savings account). Remember the order of
operations.

1 2 ( 40−10 )+5

How much money does Fred keep?

For the following exercises, solve the given problem.

According to the U.S. Mint, the diameter of a quarter is 0.955 inches.
The circumference of the quarter would be the diameter multiplied by π.
Is the circumference of a quarter a whole number, a rational number, or
an irrational number?

irrational number

Jessica and her roommate, Adriana, have decided to share a change jar
for joint expenses. Jessica put her loose change in the jar first, and
then Adriana put her change in the jar. We know that it does not matter
in which order the change was added to the jar. What property of
addition describes this fact?

For the following exercises, consider this scenario: There is a mound of
g pounds of gravel in a quarry. Throughout the day, 400 pounds of gravel
is added to the mound. Two orders of 600 pounds are sold and the gravel
is removed from the mound. At the end of the day, the mound has 1,200
pounds of gravel.

Write the equation that describes the situation.

g+400−2( 600 )=1200

Solve for *g*.

For the following exercise, solve the given problem.

Ramon runs the marketing department at their company. Their department
gets a budget every year, and every year, they must spend the entire
budget without going over. If they spend less than the budget, then the
department gets a smaller budget the following year. At the beginning of
this year, Ramon got \$2.5 million for the annual marketing budget. They
must spend the budget such that 2,500,000−x=0. What property of addition
tells us what the value of *x* must be?

inverse property of addition

## Technology {#fs-id2178453}

For the following exercises, use a graphing calculator to solve for *x*.
Round the answers to the nearest hundredth.

0.5 ( 12.3 ) 2 −48x= 3 5

( 0.25−0.75 ) 2 x−7.2=9.9

68.4

## Extensions {#fs-id1720808}

If a whole number is not a natural number, what must the number be?

Determine whether the statement is true or false: The multiplicative
inverse of a rational number is also rational.

true

Determine whether the statement is true or false: The product of a
rational and irrational number is always irrational.

Determine whether the simplified expression is rational or irrational:
−18−4( 5 )( −1 ) .

irrational

Determine whether the simplified expression is rational or irrational:
−16+4( 5 )+5 .

The division of two natural numbers will always result in what type of
number?

rational

What property of real numbers would simplify the following expression:
4+7(x−1) ?

# 

algebraic expression

constants and variables combined using addition, subtraction,
multiplication, and division

associative property of addition

the sum of three numbers may be grouped differently without affecting
the result; in symbols,

a

\+

(

b

\+

c

)

=

(

a

\+

b

)

\+

c

associative property of multiplication

the product of three numbers may be grouped differently without
affecting the result; in symbols,

a

⋅

(

b

⋅

c

)

=

(

a

⋅

b

)

⋅

c

base

in exponential notation, the expression that is being multiplied

commutative property of addition

two numbers may be added in either order without affecting the result;
in symbols,

a

\+

b

=

b

\+

a

commutative property of multiplication

two numbers may be multiplied in any order without affecting the result;
in symbols,

a

⋅

b

=

b

⋅

a

constant

a quantity that does not change value

distributive property

the product of a factor times a sum is the sum of the factor times each
term in the sum; in symbols,

a

⋅

(

b

\+

c

)

=

a

⋅

b

\+

a

⋅

c

equation

a mathematical statement indicating that two expressions are equal

exponent

in exponential notation, the raised number or variable that indicates
how many times the base is being multiplied

exponential notation

a shorthand method of writing products of the same factor

formula

an equation expressing a relationship between constant and variable
quantities

identity property of addition

there is a unique number, called the additive identity, 0, which, when
added to a number, results in the original number; in symbols,

a

\+

0

=

a

identity property of multiplication

there is a unique number, called the multiplicative identity, 1, which,
when multiplied by a number, results in the original number; in symbols,

a

⋅

1

=

a

integers

the set consisting of the natural numbers, their opposites, and 0:

{

...

,

−3

,

−2

,

−1

,

0

,

1

,

2

,

3

,...

}

inverse property of addition

for every real number

a

,

there is a unique number, called the additive inverse (or opposite),
denoted

−

a

,

which, when added to the original number, results in the additive
identity, 0; in symbols,

a

\+

(

−

a

)

=

0

inverse property of multiplication

for every non-zero real number

a

,

there is a unique number, called the multiplicative inverse (or
reciprocal), denoted

1

a

,

which, when multiplied by the original number, results in the
multiplicative identity, 1; in symbols,

a

⋅

1

a

=

1

irrational numbers

the set of all numbers that are not rational; they cannot be written as
either a terminating or repeating decimal; they cannot be expressed as a
fraction of two integers

natural numbers

the set of counting numbers:

{

1

,

2

,

3

,...

}

order of operations

a set of rules governing how mathematical expressions are to be
evaluated, assigning priorities to operations

rational numbers

the set of all numbers of the form

m

n

,

where

m

and

n

are integers and

n

≠

0\.

Any rational number may be written as a fraction or a terminating or
repeating decimal.

real number line

a horizontal line used to represent the real numbers. An arbitrary fixed
point is chosen to represent 0; positive numbers lie to the right of 0
and negative numbers to the left.

real numbers

the sets of rational numbers and irrational numbers taken together

variable

a quantity that may change value

whole numbers

the set consisting of 0 plus the natural numbers:

{

0

,

1

,

2

,

3

,...

}
