m51242

> In this section, you will:
>
> Evaluate square roots.
>
> Use the product rule to simplify square roots.
>
> Use the quotient rule to simplify square roots.
>
> Add and subtract square roots.
>
> Rationalize denominators.
>
> Use rational roots.

1834bc64-7094-4df1-a530-b3166a295697

#  {#eip-877}

## Learning Objective: {#fs-idm653475424}

Investigate the discipline called learning science and the idea of a
knowledge space.

## Objective 1: Investigate the discipline called learning science and the idea of a knowledge space. {#eip-978}

The brain is a complex organ. It is the control center for our bodies,
while the mind is where thinking and learning take place. In an attempt
to understand the processes that occur in learning, researchers study a
collection of disciplines called learning sciences. This
interdisciplinary field includes study of psychological, sociological,
anthropological, and computational approaches to learning.

In this skill sheet we will investigate the mathematics of mastery and
knowledge spaces. A knowledge space includes the possible states of
knowledge of a human learner. The theory of knowledge space was
introduced in 1985 by mathematical psychologists Jean-Paul Doignon and
Jean-Claude Falmagne and has since been studied by many researchers.
[^1]

### Practice Makes Perfect {#eip-453}

*Investigation*: There are 32 student-learning outcomes (SLO's) in a
typical College Algebra course. These are topics a student needs to
master to show proficiency in College Algebra. Let's begin by looking at
just a few of these skills. Let's assign the variables, A, B, C, and D
to the following topics. We will name the set containing each of these 4
topics, Q.

A = Graph the basic functions listed in the library of functions.

B = Find the domain of a function defined by an equation.

C = Create a new function through composition of functions.

D = Find linear functions that model data sets.

Using roster notation Q = {A, B, C, D}.

List each of the possible subsets of the 4 topics listed above using
roster notation. Remember a subset is a collection of topics in which
each topic listed is an element of the set Q we defined above. By
including a topic, we are indicating that the student has mastered the
topic.

Verify in your work above you have listed all 16 subsets to set Q.
Remember that a subset may contain all of the topics listed in Q.

What formula could you use to help you determine the number of possible
subsets? Remember that each topic could be mastered or not by a student.
Show below that your formula would be equal to 16 for a list of 4
topics.

Now use the formula you found in #3 to find the number of subsets
possible if we include all 32 student-learning outcomes.

Hint: In evaluating exponential terms, the function values increase very
rapidly. To display very large (or very small) values, a calculator will
use scientific notation. For example: 2.56 E6 is telling you to move the
decimal point 6 places to the right and to insert zeros where you have
missing values.

For example: 2.56 E6 = 2,560,000 or 2 million, five hundred, sixty
thousand.

The subsets you created in #1 are referred to as knowledge spaces in the
field of learning science. In this context mastery of one concept may
depend on your mastery of another.

*List one skill* in mathematics that would help to master each of the
following SLO's:

A = Graph the basic functions listed in the library of functions.

B = Find the domain of a function defined by an equation.

C = Create a new function through composition of functions.

D = Find linear functions that model data sets.

Mastery of what are called linchpin topics will make it easier to learn
other topics. For example, the ability to solve linear equations with
variables on both sides can "unlock" a whole set of new skills for a
student to master.

List 3 other linchpin topics that would help you to master this math
course. Discuss these with others in your class. Did they identify the
same topics?

A corequisite course in mathematics is designed to provide support to a
student by reviewing linchpin topics right when and where students need
the help. Review of these important foundational ideas allow the learner
to move on and master the student learning objectives for the course.

Brainstorm ideas with your classmates about ways this corequisite
support course could help you in your learning.

A hardware store sells 16-ft ladders and 24-ft ladders. A window is
located 12 feet above the ground. A ladder needs to be purchased that
will reach the window from a point on the ground 5 feet from the
building. To find out the length of ladder needed, we can draw a right
triangle as shown in [\#](#), and use the Pythagorean Theorem.

<figure id="Figure_01_03_001">

</figure>

$$\begin{array}{rcl}
{a^{2} + b^{2}} & = & c^{2} \\
{5^{2} + 12^{2}} & = & c^{2} \\
169 & = & c^{2}
\end{array}$$

Now, we need to find out the length that, when squared, is 169, to
determine which ladder to choose. In other words, we need to find a
square root. In this section, we will investigate methods of finding
solutions to problems such as this one.

# Evaluating Square Roots {#fs-id1167339431634}

When the square root of a number is squared, the result is the original
number. Since 4 2 =16, the square root of 16 is 4. The square root
function is the inverse of the squaring function just as subtraction is
the inverse of addition. To undo squaring, we take the square root.

In general terms, if a is a positive real number, then the square root
of a is a number that, when multiplied by itself, gives a. The square
root could be positive or negative because multiplying two negative
numbers gives a positive number. The principal square root is the
nonnegative number that when multiplied by itself equals a. The square
root obtained using a calculator is the principal square root.

The principal square root of a is written as a . The symbol is called a
radical, the term under the symbol is called the radicand, and the
entire expression is called a radical expression.

:::: {#fs-id1524853 .note}
::: title
Principal Square Root
:::

The principal square root of a is the nonnegative number that, when
multiplied by itself, equals a. It is written as a radical expression*,*
with a symbol called a radical over the term called the radicand: a .
::::

:::: {#fs-id1167339431755 .note}
::: title
:::

Q&A

*Does* 25 =±5?

*No. Although both* 5 2 *and* (−5) 2 *are* 25, *the radical symbol
implies only a nonnegative root, the principal square root. The
principal square root of 25 is* 25 =5.
::::

::: {#Example_01_03_01 .example}
Evaluate each expression.

ⓐ

100

ⓑ

16

ⓒ

25

\+

144

ⓓ

49

−

81

ⓐ

100

=

10

because

10

2

=

100

ⓑ

16

=

4

=

2

because

4

2

=

16

and

2

2

=

4

ⓒ

25

\+

144

=

169

=

13

because

13

2

=

169

ⓓ

49

−

81

=

7

−

9

=

−2

because

7

2

=

49

and

9

2

=

81
:::

:::: {#fs-id1509816 .note}
::: title
:::

Q&A

*For 25+144 , can we find the square roots before adding?*

*No.* 25 + 144 =5+12=17. *This is not equivalent to* 25+144 =13. *The
order of operations requires us to add the terms in the radicand before
finding the square root.*
::::

:::: {#fs-id1314899 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Evaluate each expression.

ⓐ

225

ⓑ

81

ⓒ

25

−

9

ⓓ

36

\+

121

ⓐ

15

ⓑ

3

ⓒ

4

ⓓ

17
::::

# Using the Product Rule to Simplify Square Roots {#fs-id1424126}

To simplify a square root, we rewrite it such that there are no perfect
squares in the radicand. There are several properties of square roots
that allow us to simplify complicated radical expressions. The first
rule we will look at is the *product rule for simplifying square roots,*
which allows us to separate the square root of a product of two numbers
into the product of two separate rational expressions. For instance, we
can rewrite 15 as 3 ⋅ 5 . We can also use the product rule to express
the product of multiple radical expressions as a single radical
expression.

:::: {#fs-id1494721 .note}
::: title
The Product Rule for Simplifying Square Roots
:::

If a and b are nonnegative, the square root of the product ab is equal
to the product of the square roots of a and b.

$$\sqrt{ab} = \sqrt{a} \cdot \sqrt{b}$$
::::

:::: {#fs-id1521678 .note}
::: title
:::

How To

*Given a square root radical expression, use the product rule to
simplify it.*

Factor any perfect squares from the radicand.

Write the radical expression as a product of radical expressions.

Simplify.
::::

::: {#Example_01_03_02 .example}
Simplify the radical expression.

ⓐ

300

ⓑ

162

a

5

b

4

ⓐ

100

⋅

3

Factor perfect square from radicand

.

100

⋅

3

Write radical expression as product of radical expressions

.

10

3

Simplify

.

ⓑ

81

a

4

b

4

⋅

2

a

Factor perfect square from radicand

.

81

a

4

b

4

⋅

2

a

Write radical expression as product of radical expressions

.

9

a

2

b

2

2

a

Simplify

.
:::

:::: {#fs-id903746 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Simplify 50 x 2 y 3 z .

5\| x \|\| y \| 2yz . Notice the absolute value signs around *x* and
*y*? That's because their value must be positive!
::::

:::: {#fs-id1291623 .note}
::: title
:::

How To

*Given the product of multiple radical expressions, use the product rule
to combine them into one radical expression.*

Express the product of multiple radical expressions as a single radical
expression.

Simplify.
::::

::: {#Example_01_03_03 .example}
Simplify the radical expression. 12 ⋅ 3

12⋅3 Express the product as a single radical expression. 36 Simplify. 6
:::

:::: {#fs-id1385114 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Simplify 50x ⋅ 2x assuming x\>0.

10\| x \|
::::

# Using the Quotient Rule to Simplify Square Roots {#fs-id1409429}

Just as we can rewrite the square root of a product as a product of
square roots, so too can we rewrite the square root of a quotient as a
quotient of square roots, using the *quotient rule for simplifying
square roots.* It can be helpful to separate the numerator and
denominator of a fraction under a radical so that we can take their
square roots separately. We can rewrite 5 2 as 5 2 .

:::: {#fs-id1442347 .note}
::: title
The Quotient Rule for Simplifying Square Roots
:::

The square root of the quotient a b is equal to the quotient of the
square roots of a and b, where b≠0.

$$\sqrt{\frac{a}{b}} = \frac{\sqrt{a}}{\sqrt{b}}$$
::::

:::: {#fs-id1529521 .note}
::: title
:::

How To

*Given a radical expression, use the quotient rule to simplify it.*

Write the radical expression as the quotient of two radical expressions.

Simplify the numerator and denominator.
::::

::: {#Example_01_03_04 .example}
Simplify the radical expression.

5 36

5 36 Write as quotient of two radical expressions. 5 6
Simplify denominator.
:::

:::: {#fs-id1520332 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Simplify 2 x 2 9 y 4 .

x 2 3 y 2 . We do not need the absolute value signs for y 2 because that
term will always be nonnegative.
::::

::: {#Example_01_03_05 .example}
Simplify the radical expression.

234 x 11 y 26 x 7 y

234 x 11 y 26 x 7 y
Combine numerator and denominator into one radical expression. 9 x 4
Simplify fraction. 3 x 2   Simplify square root.
:::

:::: {#fs-id1343544 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Simplify 9 a 5 b 14 3 a 4 b 5 .

b 4 3ab
::::

# Adding and Subtracting Square Roots {#fs-id1413677}

We can add or subtract radical expressions only when they have the same
radicand and when they have the same radical type such as square roots.
For example, the sum of 2 and 3 2 is 4 2 . However, it is often possible
to simplify radical expressions, and that may change the radicand. The
radical expression 18 can be written with a 2 in the radicand, as 3 2 ,
so 2 + 18 = 2 +3 2 =4 2 .

:::: {#fs-id1322507 .note}
::: title
:::

How To

*Given a radical expression requiring addition or subtraction of square
roots, simplify.*

Simplify each radical expression.

Add or subtract expressions with equal radicands.
::::

::: {#Example_01_03_06 .example}
Add 5 12 +2 3 .

We can rewrite 5 12 as 5 4·3 . According the product rule, this becomes
5 4 3 . The square root of 4 is 2, so the expression becomes 5( 2 ) 3 ,
which is 10 3 . Now the terms have the same radicand so we can add.

10 3 +2 3 =12 3
:::

:::: {#fs-id1494905 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Add 5 +6 20 .

13 5
::::

::: {#Example_01_03_07 .example}
Subtract 20 72 a 3 b 4 c −14 8 a 3 b 4 c .

Factor 9 out of the first term so that both terms have equal radicands.

$$\begin{array}{cclcl}
{20\sqrt{72a^{3}b^{4}c}} & = & {20\sqrt{9 \cdot 8a^{3}b^{4}c}} & = & {20\sqrt{9}\sqrt{8a^{3}b^{4}c}} \\
 & = & {20(3)\sqrt{8a^{3}b^{4}c}} & = & {60\sqrt{8a^{3}b^{4}c}}
\end{array}$$

So

$$\begin{array}{l}
{20\sqrt{72a^{3}b^{4}c} - 14\sqrt{8a^{3}b^{4}c}} \\
{= 60\sqrt{8a^{3}b^{4}c} - 14\sqrt{8a^{3}b^{4}c}} \\
{= 46\sqrt{8a^{3}b^{4}c}}
\end{array}$$
:::

:::: {#fs-id1481719 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Subtract 3 80x −4 45x .

0
::::

# Rationalizing Denominators {#fs-id1483223}

When an expression involving square root radicals is written in simplest
form, it will not contain a radical in the denominator. We can remove
radicals from the denominators of fractions using a process called
*rationalizing the denominator*.

We know that multiplying by 1 does not change the value of an
expression. We use this property of multiplication to change expressions
that contain radicals in the denominator. To remove radicals from the
denominators of fractions, multiply by the form of 1 that will eliminate
the radical.

For a denominator containing a single term, multiply by the radical in
the denominator over itself. In other words, if the denominator is b c ,
multiply by c c .

For a denominator containing the sum or difference of a rational and an
irrational term, multiply the numerator and denominator by the conjugate
of the denominator, which is found by changing the sign of the radical
portion of the denominator. If the denominator is a+b c , then the
conjugate is a−b c .

:::: {#fs-id1507274 .note}
::: title
:::

How To

*Given an expression with a single square root radical term in the
denominator, rationalize the denominator.*

Multiply the numerator and denominator by the radical in the
denominator.

Simplify.
::::

::: {#Example_01_03_08 .example}
Write 2 3 3 10 in simplest form.

The radical in the denominator is 10 . So multiply the fraction by 10 10
. Then simplify.

$$\begin{array}{l}
{\frac{2\sqrt{3}}{3\sqrt{10}} \cdot \frac{\sqrt{10}}{\sqrt{10}}\mspace{9mu}\text{~~~}} \\
{\frac{2\sqrt{30}}{30}\mspace{9mu}\text{~~~~~~~~~~}} \\
\frac{\sqrt{30}}{15}
\end{array}$$
:::

:::: {#fs-id1485671 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Write 12 3 2 in simplest form.

6 6
::::

:::: {#fs-id1167339431925 .note}
::: title
:::

How To

*Given an expression with a radical term and a constant in the
denominator, rationalize the denominator.*

Find the conjugate of the denominator.

Multiply the numerator and denominator by the conjugate.

Use the distributive property.

Simplify.
::::

::: {#Example_01_03_09 .example}
Write 4 1+ 5 in simplest form.

Begin by finding the conjugate of the denominator by writing the
denominator and changing the sign. So the conjugate of 1+ 5 is 1− 5 .
Then multiply the fraction by 1− 5 1− 5 .

$$\begin{array}{lc}
{\frac{4}{1 + \sqrt{5}} \cdot \frac{1 - \sqrt{5}}{1 - \sqrt{5}}} & \\
\frac{4 - 4\sqrt{5}}{- 4} & {\qquad\text{Use~the~distributive~property}.} \\
{\sqrt{5} - 1} & {\qquad\text{Simplify}.}
\end{array}$$
:::

:::: {#fs-id1167339431968 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Write 7 2+ 3 in simplest form.

14−7 3
::::

# Using Rational Roots {#fs-id1167339432042}

Although square roots are the most common rational roots, we can also
find cube roots, 4th roots, 5th roots, and more. Just as the square root
function is the inverse of the squaring function, these roots are the
inverse of their respective power functions. These functions can be
useful when we need to determine the number that, when raised to a
certain power, gives a certain number.

## Understanding *n*th Roots {#fs-id1167339432053}

Suppose we know that a 3 =8. We want to find what number raised to the
3rd power is equal to 8. Since 2 3 =8, we say that 2 is the cube root of
8.

The *n*th root of a is a number that, when raised to the *n*th power,
gives a. For example, −3 is the 5th root of −243 because (−3) 5 =−243.
If a is a real number with at least one *n*th root, then the principal
*n*th root of a is the number with the same sign as a that, when raised
to the *n*th power, equals a.

The principal *n*th root of a is written as a n , where n is a positive
integer greater than or equal to 2. In the radical expression, n is
called the index of the radical.

:::: {#fs-id1167339434398 .note}
::: title
Principal n th Root
:::

If a is a real number with at least one *n*th root, then the principal
*n*th root of a, written as a n , is the number with the same sign as a
that, when raised to the *n*th power, equals a. The index of the radical
is n.
::::

::: {#Example_01_03_10 .example}
Simplify each of the following:

ⓐ

−32

5

ⓑ

4

4

⋅

1

,

024

4

ⓒ

−

8

x

6

125

3

ⓓ

8

3

4

−

48

4

ⓐ

−32

5

=

−2

because

(

−2

)

5

=

−32

ⓑ

First, express the product as a single radical expression.

4,096

4

=

8

because

8

4

=

4,096

ⓒ

−

8

x

6

3

125

3

Write as quotient of two radical expressions

.

−

2

x

2

5

Simplify

.

ⓓ

8

3

4

−

2

3

4

Simplify to get equal radicands

.

6

3

4

Add

.
:::

:::: {#fs-id1167339435023 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Simplify.

ⓐ

−216

3

ⓑ

3

80

4

5

4

ⓒ

6

9

,

000

3

\+

7

576

3

ⓐ

−6

ⓑ

6

ⓒ

88

9

3
::::

## Using Rational Exponents {#fs-id1538427}

Radical expressions can also be written without using the radical
symbol. We can use rational (fractional) exponents. The index must be a
positive integer. If the index n is even, then a cannot be negative.

$$a^{\frac{1}{n}} = \sqrt[n]{a}$$

We can also have rational exponents with numerators other than 1. In
these cases, the exponent must be a fraction in lowest terms. We raise
the base to a power and take an *n*th root. The numerator tells us the
power and the denominator tells us the root.

$$a^{\frac{m}{n}} = \left( \sqrt[n]{a} \right)^{m} = \sqrt[n]{a^{m}}$$

All of the properties of exponents that we learned for integer exponents
also hold for rational exponents.

:::: {#fs-id1529206 .note}
::: title
Rational Exponents
:::

Rational exponents are another way to express principal *n*th roots. The
general form for converting between a radical expression with a radical
symbol and one with a rational exponent is

$$a^{\frac{m}{n}} = \left( \sqrt[n]{a} \right)^{m} = \sqrt[n]{a^{m}}$$
::::

:::: {#fs-id1520158 .note}
::: title
:::

How To

*Given an expression with a rational exponent, write the expression as a
radical.*

Determine the power by looking at the numerator of the exponent.

Determine the root by looking at the denominator of the exponent.

Using the base as the radicand, raise the radicand to the power and use
the root as the index.
::::

::: {#Example_01_03_11 .example}
Write 343 2 3 as a radical. Simplify.

The 2 tells us the power and the 3 tells us the root.

343 2 3 = ( 343 3 ) 2 = 343 2 3

We know that 343 3 =7 because 7 3 =343. Because the cube root is easy to
find, it is easiest to find the cube root before squaring for this
problem. In general, it is easier to find the root first and then raise
it to a power.

343 2 3 = ( 343 3 ) 2 = 7 2 =49
:::

:::: {#fs-id1501835 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Write 9 5 2 as a radical. Simplify.

( 9 ) 5 = 3 5 =243
::::

::: {#Example_01_03_12 .example}
Write 4 a 2 7 using a rational exponent.

The power is 2 and the root is 7, so the rational exponent will be 2 7 .
We get 4 a 2 7 . Using properties of exponents, we get 4 a 2 7 =4 a −2 7
.
:::

:::: {#fs-id1483634 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Write x (5y) 9 using a rational exponent.

x (5y) 9 2
::::

::: {#Example_01_03_13 .example}
Simplify:

ⓐ

5

(

2

x

3

4

)

(

3

x

1

5

)

ⓑ

(

16

9

)

−

1

2

ⓐ 30 x 3 4 x 1 5 Multiply the coefficients. 30 x 3 4 + 1 5
Use properties of exponents. 30 x 19 20 Simplify.

ⓑ ( 9 16 ) 1 2   Use definition of negative exponents. 9 16
  Rewrite as a radical. 9 16   Use the quotient rule. 3 4   Simplify.
:::

:::: {#fs-id1538438 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Simplify ( 8x ) 1 3 ( 14 x 6 5 ).

28 x 23 15
::::

:::: {#fs-id1487278 .note}
::: title
:::

Media

Access these online resources for additional instruction and practice
with radicals and rational exponents.

Radicals

Rational Exponents

Simplify Radicals

Rationalize Denominator
::::

# Key Concepts {#fs-id1476966}

The principal square root of a number

a

is the nonnegative number that when multiplied by itself equals

a

.

See

.

If

a

and

b

are nonnegative, the square root of the product

a

b

is equal to the product of the square roots of

a

and

b

See

and

.

If

a

and

b

are nonnegative, the square root of the quotient

a

b

is equal to the quotient of the square roots of

a

and

b

See

and

.

We can add and subtract radical expressions if they have the same
radicand and the same index. See

and

.

Radical expressions written in simplest form do not contain a radical in
the denominator. To eliminate the square root radical from the
denominator, multiply both the numerator and the denominator by the
conjugate of the denominator. See

and

.

The principal

n

th root of

a

is the number with the same sign as

a

that when raised to the

n

th power equals

a

.

These roots have the same properties as square roots.

See

.

Radicals can be rewritten as rational exponents and rational exponents
can be rewritten as radicals. See

and

.

The properties of exponents apply to rational exponents. See

.

# Section Exercises {#fs-id1499197}

## Verbal {#fs-id1499203}

What does it mean when a radical does not have an index? Is the
expression equal to the radicand? Explain.

When there is no index, it is assumed to be 2 or the square root. The
expression would only be equal to the radicand if the index were 1.

Where would radicals come in the order of operations? Explain why.

Every number will have two square roots. What is the principal square
root?

The principal square root is the nonnegative root of the number.

Can a radical with a negative radicand have a real square root? Why or
why not?

## Numeric {#fs-id1538381}

For the following exercises, simplify each expression.

256

16

256

4( 9+16 )

10

289 − 121

196

14

1

98

7 2

27 64

81 5

9 5 5

800

169 + 144

25

8 50

18 162

2

192

14 6 −6 24

2 6

15 5 +7 45

150

5 6

96 100

( 42 )( 30 )

6 35

12 3 −4 75

4 225

2 15

405 324

360 361

6 10 19

5 1+ 3

8 1− 17

− 1+ 17 2

16 4

128 3 +3 2 3

7 2 3

−32 243 5

15 125 4 5 4

15 5

3 −432 3 + 16 3

## Algebraic {#fs-id1167339436110}

For the following exercises, simplify each expression.

400 x 4

20 x 2

4 y 2

49p

7 p

( 144 p 2 q 6 ) 1 2

m 5 2 289

17 m 2 m

9 3 m 2 + 27

3 a b 2 −b a

2b a

4 2n 16 n 4

225 x 3 49x

15x 7

3 44z + 99z

50 y 8

5 y 4 2

490b c 2

32 14d

4 7d 7d

q 3 2 63p

8 1− 3x

2 2 +2 6x 1−3x

20 121 d 4

w 3 2 32 − w 3 2 50

−w 2w

108 x 4 + 27 x 4

12x 2+2 3

3 x − 3x 2

147 k 3

125 n 10

5 n 5 5

42q 36 q 3

81m 361 m 2

9 m 19m

72c −2 2c

144 324 d 2

2 3d

24 x 6 3 + 81 x 6 3

162 x 6 16 x 4 4

3 2 x 2 4 2

64y 3

128 z 3 3 − −16 z 3 3

6z 2 3

1,024 c 10 5

## Real-World Applications {#fs-id1167339437814}

A guy wire for a suspension bridge runs from the ground diagonally to
the top of the closest pylon to make a triangle. We can use the
Pythagorean Theorem to find the length of guy wire needed. The square of
the distance between the wire on the ground and the pylon on the ground
is 90,000 feet. The square of the height of the pylon is 160,000 feet.
So the length of the guy wire can be found by evaluating 90,000+160,000
. What is the length of the guy wire?

500 feet

A car accelerates at a rate of 6− 4 t m/s 2 where *t* is the time in
seconds after the car moves from rest. Simplify the expression.

## Extensions {#fs-id1167339437932}

For the following exercises, simplify each expression.

8 − 16 4− 2 − 2 1 2

−5 2 −6 7

4 3 2 − 16 3 2 8 1 3

m n 3 a 2 c −3 ⋅ a −7 n −2 m 2 c 4

mnc a 9 cmn

a a− c

x 64y +4 y 128y

2 x+1 2 2

( 250 x 2 100 b 3 )( 7 b 125x )

64 3 + 256 4 64 + 256

3 3

# 

index

the number above the radical sign indicating the

n

th root

principal

n

th root

the number with the same sign as

a

that when raised to the

n

th power equals

a

principal square root

the nonnegative square root of a number

a

that, when multiplied by itself, equals

a

radical

the symbol used to indicate a root

radical expression

an expression containing a radical symbol

radicand

the number under the radical symbol

[^1]: Doignon, J.-P.; Falmagne, J.-Cl. (1985), \"Spaces for the
    assessment of knowledge\", International Journal of Man-Machine
    Studies.
