m51246

> In this section, you will:
>
> Identify the degree and leading coefficient of polynomials.
>
> Add and subtract polynomials.
>
> Multiply polynomials.
>
> Use FOIL to multiply binomials.
>
> Perform operations with polynomials of several variables.

f7978ad8-ed27-4fe4-8a19-26a031ba97ad

#  {#fs-idm332534352}

## Learning Objectives {#fs-idm373429968}

Distinguish between a fixed and a growth mindset, and how these ideas
may help in learning.

## Objective 1: Distinguish between a fixed and a growth mindset, and how these ideas may help in learning. {#eip-567}

Stanford University psychologist and researcher, Carol Dweck, PH.D.,
published a book in 2006 called *\"Mindset, The New Psychology of
Success\"*, which changed how many people think about their talents and
abilities. Based on decades of research Dr. Dweck outlined two mindsets
and their influence on our learning.

Dr. Dweck's research found that people who believe that their abilities
could change through learning and practice (growth mindset) more readily
accepted learning challenges and persisted through these challenges.
While individuals who believe that knowledge and abilities come from
natural talent and cannot be changed (fixed mindset) more often become
discouraged by failure and do not persist.

Her research shows that if we believe we can learn and master something
new, this belief greatly improves our ability to learn.

Read through the following illustration based on Dr. Dweck's work.

It's important to note that we as individuals do not have a strict fixed
or growth mindset at all times. We can lean one way or another in
certain situations or when working in different disciplines or areas.
For example, a person who often plays video games may feel they can
learn any new game that is released and be confident in these abilities,
but at the same time avoid sports and are fixed on the idea that they
will never excel at physical activities.

In terms of learning new skills in mathematics, which mindset, growth or
fixed, best describes your beliefs as of today? Explain.

<figure id="fixed_growth">

</figure>

Identify each of the following statements as coming from a student with
a fixed mindset or with a growth mindset.

  Statement                                                                                                                   Fixed or Growth Mindset?
  --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- --------------------------
  a\. I've never been good at math, so I'll be happy just getting a D in this course.                                         
  b\. I hear that this instructor is really great, I'm excited to start this new term.                                        
  c\. I need to try harder in this class and put in more study time. I have the rest of the term to improve my performance.   
  d\. I hate math.                                                                                                            
  e\. This activity is dumb, I don't think it will help me.                                                                   
  f\. That exam was tough, but I'm going to rework it during my study time and get these concepts down before my final.       
  g\. I'm up for the challenge of this course.                                                                                
  h\. Some people are just better in math than me.                                                                            
  i\. Intelligence is something you have to work for.                                                                         
  j\. I find it best to erase every mistake I make in my homework and try to forget about it.                                 
  k\. I try to learn from my mistakes and make note of them.                                                                  
  l\. I'm not going to raise my hand to answer this question in class. I'll just be wrong.                                    

Mindsets can be changed. As Dr. Dweck would say "You have a choice.
Mindsets are just beliefs. They are powerful beliefs, but they are
something in your mind and you can change your mind."

Think about what you would like to achieve in your classes this term and
how a growth mindset can help you reach these goals. Write three goals
for yourself below.

Maahi is building a little free library (a small house-shaped book
repository), whose front is in the shape of a square topped with a
triangle. There will be a rectangular door through which people can take
and donate books. Maahi wants to find the area of the front of the
library so that they can purchase the correct amount of paint. Using the
measurements of the front of the house, shown in [\#](#), we can create
an expression that combines several variable terms, allowing us to solve
this problem and others like it.

<figure id="Figure_01_04_001">

</figure>

First find the area of the square in square feet.

$$\begin{array}{ccl}
A & = & s^{2} \\
 & = & {(2x)}^{2} \\
 & = & {4x^{2}}
\end{array}$$

Then find the area of the triangle in square feet.

$$\begin{array}{ccl}
A & = & {\frac{1}{2}bh} \\
 & = & {\mspace{9mu}\frac{1}{2}(2x)\left( \frac{3}{2} \right)} \\
 & = & {\mspace{9mu}\frac{3}{2}x}
\end{array}$$

Next find the area of the rectangular door in square feet.

$$\begin{array}{ccl}
A & = & {lw} \\
 & = & {x \cdot 1} \\
 & = & x
\end{array}$$

The area of the front of the library can be found by adding the areas of
the square and the triangle, and then subtracting the area of the
rectangle. When we do this, we get 4 x 2 + 3 2 xŌłÆx ft 2 , or 4 x 2 + 1 2
x ft2.

In this section, we will examine expressions such as this one, which
combine several variable terms.

# Identifying the Degree and Leading Coefficient of Polynomials {#fs-id1167339226748}

The formula just found is an example of a polynomial, which is a sum of
or difference of terms, each consisting of a variable raised to a
nonnegative integer power. A number multiplied by a variable raised to
an exponent, such as 384ŽĆ, is known as a coefficient. Coefficients can
be positive, negative, or zero, and can be whole numbers, decimals, or
fractions. Each product a i x i , such as 384ŽĆw, is a term of a
polynomial. If a term does not contain a variable, it is called a
*constant*.

A polynomial containing only one term, such as 5 x 4 , is called a
monomial. A polynomial containing two terms, such as 2xŌłÆ9, is called a
binomial. A polynomial containing three terms, such as ŌłÆ3 x 2 +8xŌłÆ7, is
called a trinomial.

We can find the degree of a polynomial by identifying the highest power
of the variable that occurs in the polynomial. The term with the highest
degree is called the leading term because it is usually written first.
The coefficient of the leading term is called the leading coefficient.
When a polynomial is written so that the powers are descending, we say
that it is in standard form.

:::: {#fs-id1167339137964 .note}
::: title
Polynomials
:::

A polynomial is an expression that can be written in the form

$$a_{n}x^{n} + ... + a_{2}x^{2} + a_{1}x + a_{0}$$

Each real number *ai* is called a coefficient. The number a 0 that is
not multiplied by a variable is called a *constant*. Each product a i x
i is a term of a polynomial. The highest power of the variable that
occurs in the polynomial is called the degree of a polynomial. The
leading term is the term with the highest power, and its coefficient is
called the leading coefficient.
::::

:::: {#fs-id1167339231820 .note}
::: title
:::

How To

*Given a polynomial expression, identify the degree and leading
coefficient*.

Find the highest power of

x

to determine the degree.

Identify the term containing the highest power of

x

to find the leading term.

Identify the coefficient of the leading term.
::::

::: {#Example_01_04_01 .example}
For the following polynomials, identify the degree, the leading term,
and the leading coefficient.

ŌōÉ

3

\+

2

x

2

ŌłÆ

4

x

3

Ōōæ

5

t

5

ŌłÆ

2

t

3

\+

7

t

ŌōÆ

6

p

ŌłÆ

p

3

ŌłÆ

2

ŌōÉ

The highest power of

x

is 3, so the degree is 3. The leading term is the term containing that
degree,

ŌłÆ4

x

3

.

The leading coefficient is the coefficient of that term,

ŌłÆ4.

Ōōæ

The highest power of

t

is

5

,

so the degree is

5\.

The leading term is the term containing that degree,

5

t

5

.

The leading coefficient is the coefficient of that term,

5\.

ŌōÆ

The highest power of

p

is

3

,

so the degree is

3\.

The leading term is the term containing that degree,

ŌłÆ

p

3

,

The leading coefficient is the coefficient of that term,

ŌłÆ1.
:::

:::: {#fs-id1167339220571 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Identify the degree, leading term, and leading coefficient of the
polynomial 4 x 2 ŌłÆ x 6 +2xŌłÆ6.

The degree is 6, the leading term is ŌłÆ x 6 , and the leading coefficient
is ŌłÆ1.
::::

# Adding and Subtracting Polynomials {#fs-id1167339243781}

We can add and subtract polynomials by combining like terms, which are
terms that contain the same variables raised to the same exponents. For
example, 5 x 2 and ŌłÆ2 x 2 are like terms, and can be added to get 3 x 2
, but 3x and 3 x 2 are not like terms, and therefore cannot be added.

:::: {#fs-id1167339290474 .note}
::: title
:::

How To

*Given multiple polynomials, add or subtract them to simplify the
expressions.*

Combine like terms.

Simplify and write in standard form.
::::

::: {#Example_01_04_02 .example}
Find the sum.

( 12 x 2 +9xŌłÆ21 )+( 4 x 3 +8 x 2 ŌłÆ5x+20 )

4 x 3 +( 12 x 2 +8 x 2 )+(9xŌłÆ5x)+(ŌłÆ21+20)┬Ā ŌĆāŌĆāCombine┬Ālike┬Āterms. 4 x 3
+20 x 2 +4xŌłÆ1 ŌĆāŌĆāSimplify.

We can check our answers to these types of problems using a graphing
calculator. To check, graph the problem as given along with the
simplified answer. The two graphs should be equivalent. Be sure to use
the same window to compare the graphs. Using different windows can make
the expressions seem equivalent when they are not.
:::

:::: {#fs-id1167339243320 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Find the sum.

( 2 x 3 +5 x 2 ŌłÆx+1 )+( 2 x 2 ŌłÆ3xŌłÆ4 )

2 x 3 +7 x 2 ŌłÆ4xŌłÆ3
::::

::: {#Example_01_04_03 .example}
Find the difference.

( 7 x 4 ŌłÆ x 2 +6x+1 )ŌłÆ( 5 x 3 ŌłÆ2 x 2 +3x+2 )

7 x 4 ŌłÆ x 2 +6 x + 1 -5 x 3 +2x2-3xŌłÆ2 Distribute negative sign. 7 x 4 ŌłÆ5
x 3 + x 2 +6xŌłÆ3x+1-2 Group like terms. 7 x 4 ŌłÆ5 x 3 + x 2 +3 x-1
Combine/simplify.

Note that finding the difference between two polynomials is the same as
adding the opposite of the second polynomial to the first.
:::

:::: {#fs-id1167339156471 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Find the difference.

( ŌłÆ7 x 3 ŌłÆ7 x 2 +6xŌłÆ2 )ŌłÆ( 4 x 3 ŌłÆ6 x 2 ŌłÆx+7 )

ŌłÆ11 x 3 ŌłÆ x 2 +7xŌłÆ9
::::

# Multiplying Polynomials {#fs-id1167339214258}

Multiplying polynomials is a bit more challenging than adding and
subtracting polynomials. We must use the distributive property to
multiply each term in the first polynomial by each term in the second
polynomial. We then combine like terms. We can also use a shortcut
called the FOIL method when multiplying binomials. Certain special
products follow patterns that we can memorize and use instead of
multiplying the polynomials by hand each time. We will look at a variety
of ways to multiply polynomials.

## Multiplying Polynomials Using the Distributive Property {#fs-id1167339198311}

To multiply a number by a polynomial, we use the distributive property.
The number must be distributed to each term of the polynomial. We can
distribute the 2 in 2(x+7) to obtain the equivalent expression 2x+14.
When multiplying polynomials, the distributive property allows us to
multiply each term of the first polynomial by each term of the second.
We then add the products together and combine like terms to simplify.

:::: {#fs-id1167339260622 .note}
::: title
:::

How To

*Given the multiplication of two polynomials, use the distributive
property to simplify the expression.*

Multiply each term of the first polynomial by each term of the second.

Combine like terms.

Simplify.
::::

::: {#Example_01_04_04 .example}
Find the product.

( 2x+1 )( 3 x 2 ŌłÆx+4 )

2x( 3 x 2 ŌłÆx+4 )+1( 3 x 2 ŌłÆx+4 )┬Ā ŌĆāŌĆāUse┬Āthe┬Ādistributive┬Āproperty. ( 6 x
3 ŌłÆ2 x 2 +8x )+( 3 x 2 ŌłÆx+4 ) ŌĆāŌĆāMultiply. 6 x 3 +( ŌłÆ2 x 2 +3 x 2
)+(8xŌłÆx)+4 ŌĆāŌĆāCombine┬Ālike┬Āterms. 6 x 3 + x 2 +7x+4┬Ā ŌĆāŌĆāSimplify.

We can use a table to keep track of our work, as shown in [\#](#). Write
one polynomial across the top and the other down the side. For each box
in the table, multiply the term for that row by the term for that
column. Then add all of the terms together, combine like terms, and
simplify.

  ---- ------- -------- ----
       3 x 2   ŌłÆx       +4
  2x   6 x 3   ŌłÆ2 x 2   8x
  +1   3 x 2   ŌłÆx       4
  ---- ------- -------- ----
:::

:::: {#fs-id1167339260552 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Find the product.

(3x+2)( x 3 ŌłÆ4 x 2 +7 )

3 x 4 ŌłÆ10 x 3 ŌłÆ8 x 2 +21x+14
::::

## Using FOIL to Multiply Binomials {#fs-id1167339243382}

A shortcut called FOIL is sometimes used to find the product of two
binomials. It is called FOIL because we multiply the *f*irst terms, the
*o*uter terms, the *i*nner terms, and then the *l*ast terms of each
binomial.

The FOIL method arises out of the distributive property. We are simply
multiplying each term of the first binomial by each term of the second
binomial, and then combining like terms.

:::: {#fs-id1167339429094 .note}
::: title
:::

How To

*Given two binomials, use FOIL to simplify the expression.*

Multiply the first terms of each binomial.

Multiply the outer terms of the binomials.

Multiply the inner terms of the binomials.

Multiply the last terms of each binomial.

Add the products.

Combine like terms and simplify.
::::

::: {#Example_01_04_05 .example}
Use FOIL to find the product.

(2x-18)(3x+3)

Find the product of the first terms.

Find the product of the outer terms.

Find the product of the inner terms.

Find the product of the last terms.

6 x 2 +6xŌłÆ54xŌłÆ54 Add┬Āthe┬Āproducts. 6 x 2 +(6xŌłÆ54x)ŌłÆ54
Combine┬Ālike┬Āterms. 6 x 2 ŌłÆ48xŌłÆ54 Simplify.
:::

:::: {#fs-id1167339223541 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Use FOIL to find the product.

(x+7)(3xŌłÆ5)

3 x 2 +16xŌłÆ35
::::

## Perfect Square Trinomials {#fs-id1167339428910}

Certain binomial products have special forms. When a binomial is
squared, the result is called a perfect square trinomial. We can find
the square by multiplying the binomial by itself. However, there is a
special form that each of these perfect square trinomials takes, and
memorizing the form makes squaring binomials much easier and faster.
Let's look at a few perfect square trinomials to familiarize ourselves
with the form.

$$\begin{array}{rcl}
{\mspace{9mu}{(x + 5)}^{2}} & = & {x^{2} + 10x + 25} \\
{(x - 3)}^{2} & = & {\mspace{9mu} x^{2} - 6x + 9} \\
{(4x - 1)}^{2} & = & {16x^{2} - 8x + 1}
\end{array}$$

Notice that the first term of each trinomial is the square of the first
term of the binomial and, similarly, the last term of each trinomial is
the square of the last term of the binomial. The middle term is double
the product of the two terms. Lastly, we see that the first sign of the
trinomial is the same as the sign of the binomial.

:::: {#fs-id1167339224300 .note}
::: title
Perfect Square Trinomials
:::

When a binomial is squared, the result is the first term squared added
to double the product of both terms and the last term squared.

$${(x + a)}^{2} = (x + a)(x + a) = x^{2} + 2ax + a^{2}$$
::::

:::: {#fs-id1167339220526 .note}
::: title
:::

How To

*Given a binomial, square it using the formula for perfect square
trinomials.*

Square the first term of the binomial.

Square the last term of the binomial.

For the middle term of the trinomial, double the product of the two
terms.

Add and simplify.
::::

::: {#Example_01_04_06 .example}
Expand (3xŌłÆ8) 2 .

Begin by squaring the first term and the last term. For the middle term
of the trinomial, double the product of the two terms.

$${(3x)}^{2} - 2(3x)(8) + {(-8)}^{2}$$

Simplify.$$9x^{2} - 48x + 64.$$
:::

:::: {#fs-id1167339328808 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Expand (4xŌłÆ1) 2 .

16 x 2 ŌłÆ8x+1
::::

## Difference of Squares {#fs-id1167339429838}

Another special product is called the difference of squares, which
occurs when we multiply a binomial by another binomial with the same
terms but the opposite sign. Let's see what happens when we multiply
(x+1)(xŌłÆ1) using the FOIL method.

$$\begin{array}{ccl}
{(x + 1)(x - 1)} & = & {x^{2} - x + x - 1} \\
 & = & {x^{2} - 1}
\end{array}$$

The middle term drops out, resulting in a difference of squares. Just as
we did with the perfect squares, let's look at a few examples.

$$\begin{array}{rcl}
{(x + 5)(x - 5)} & = & {x^{2} - 25} \\
{(x + 11)(x - 11)} & = & {x^{2} - 121} \\
{(2x + 3)(2x - 3)} & = & {4x^{2} - 9}
\end{array}$$

Because the sign changes in the second binomial, the outer and inner
terms cancel each other out, and we are left only with the square of the
first term minus the square of the last term.

:::: {#fs-id1167339220817 .note}
::: title
:::

Q&A

*Is there a special form for the sum of squares?*

*No. The difference of squares occurs because the opposite signs of the
binomials cause the middle terms to disappear. There are no two
binomials that multiply to equal a sum of squares.*
::::

:::: {#fs-id1167339199666 .note}
::: title
Difference of Squares
:::

When a binomial is multiplied by a binomial with the same terms
separated by the opposite sign, the result is the square of the first
term minus the square of the last term.

$$(a + b)(a - b) = a^{2} - b^{2}$$
::::

:::: {#fs-id1167339137913 .note}
::: title
:::

How To

*Given a binomial multiplied by a binomial with the same terms but the
opposite sign, find the difference of squares.*

Square the first term of the binomials.

Square the last term of the binomials.

Subtract the square of the last term from the square of the first term.
::::

::: {#Example_01_04_07 .example}
Multiply (9x+4)(9xŌłÆ4).

Square the first term to get (9x) 2 =81 x 2 . Square the last term to
get 4 2 =16. Subtract the square of the last term from the square of the
first term to find the product of 81 x 2 ŌłÆ16.
:::

:::: {#fs-id1167339138650 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Multiply (2x+7)(2xŌłÆ7).

4 x 2 ŌłÆ49
::::

# Performing Operations with Polynomials of Several Variables {#fs-id1167339138125}

We have looked at polynomials containing only one variable. However, a
polynomial can contain several variables. All of the same rules apply
when working with polynomials containing several variables. Consider an
example:

$$\begin{array}{ll}
{(a + 2b)(4a - b - c)} & \\
{a(4a - b - c) + 2b(4a - b - c)} & {\qquad\text{Use~the~distributive~property}.} \\
{4a^{2} - ab - ac + 8ab - 2b^{2} - 2bc} & {\qquad\text{Multiply}.} \\
{4a^{2} + ( - ab + 8ab) - ac - 2b^{2} - 2bc} & {\qquad\text{Combine~like~terms}.} \\
{4a^{2} + 7ab - ac - 2bc - 2b^{2}} & {\qquad\text{Simplify}.}
\end{array}$$

::: {#Example_01_04_08 .example}
Multiply (x+4)(3xŌłÆ2y+5).

Follow the same steps that we used to multiply polynomials containing
only one variable.

$$\begin{array}{ll}
{x(3x - 2y + 5) + 4(3x - 2y + 5)~} & {\qquad\text{Use~the~distributive~property}.} \\
{3x^{2} - 2xy + 5x + 12x - 8y + 20} & {\qquad\text{Multiply}.} \\
{3x^{2} - 2xy + (5x + 12x) - 8y + 20} & {\qquad\text{Combine~like~terms}.} \\
{3x^{2} - 2xy + 17x - 8y + 20~} & {\qquad\text{Simplify}.}
\end{array}$$
:::

:::: {#fs-id1167339240133 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Multiply (3xŌłÆ1)(2x+7yŌłÆ9).

6 x 2 +21xyŌłÆ29xŌłÆ7y+9
::::

:::: {#fs-id1167339315650 .note}
::: title
:::

Media

Access these online resources for additional instruction and practice
with polynomials.

Adding and Subtracting Polynomials

Multiplying Polynomials

Special Products of Polynomials
::::

# Key Equations {#fs-id1167339219247}

  -------------------------- ------------------------------------
  perfect square trinomial   (x+a) 2 =(x+a)(x+a)= x 2 +2ax+ a 2
  difference of squares      (a+b)(aŌłÆb)= a 2 ŌłÆ b 2
  -------------------------- ------------------------------------

# Key Concepts {#fs-id1167339242305}

A polynomial is a sum of terms each consisting of a variable raised to a
non-negative integer power. The degree is the highest power of the
variable that occurs in the polynomial. The leading term is the term
containing the highest degree, and the leading coefficient is the
coefficient of that term. See

.

We can add and subtract polynomials by combining like terms. See

and

.

To multiply polynomials, use the distributive property to multiply each
term in the first polynomial by each term in the second. Then add the
products. See

.

FOIL (First, Outer, Inner, Last) is a shortcut that can be used to
multiply binomials. See

.

Perfect square trinomials and difference of squares are special
products. See

and

.

Follow the same rules to work with polynomials containing several
variables. See

.

# Section Exercises {#fs-id1167339184236}

## Verbal {#fs-id1167339184243}

Evaluate the following statement: The degree of a polynomial in standard
form is the exponent of the leading term. Explain why the statement is
true or false.

The statement is true. In standard form, the polynomial with the highest
value exponent is placed first and is the leading term. The degree of a
polynomial is the value of the highest exponent, which in standard form
is also the exponent of the leading term.

Many times, multiplying two binomials with two variables results in a
trinomial. This is not the case when there is a difference of two
squares. Explain why the product in this case is also a binomial.

You can multiply polynomials with any number of terms and any number of
variables using four basic steps over and over until you reach the
expanded polynomial. What are the four steps?

Use the distributive property, multiply, combine like terms, and
simplify.

State whether the following statement is true and explain why or why
not: A trinomial is always a higher degree than a monomial.

## Algebraic {#fs-id1167339216165}

For the following exercises, identify the degree of the polynomial.

7xŌłÆ2 x 2 +13

2

14 m 3 + m 2 ŌłÆ16m+8

ŌłÆ625 a 8 +16 b 4

8

200pŌłÆ30 p 2 m+40 m 3

x 2 +4x+4

2

6 y 4 ŌłÆ y 5 +3yŌłÆ4

For the following exercises, find the sum or difference.

( 12 x 2 +3x )ŌłÆ( 8 x 2 ŌłÆ19 )

4 x 2 +3x+19

( 4 z 3 +8 z 2 ŌłÆz )+( ŌłÆ2 z 2 +z+6 )

( 6 w 2 +24w+24 )ŌłÆ( 3w ŌłÆ 2 6w+3 )

3 w 2 +30w+21

( 7 a 3 +6 a 2 ŌłÆ4aŌłÆ13 )+( ŌłÆ3 a 3 ŌłÆ4 a 2 +6a+17 )

( 11 b 4 ŌłÆ6 b 3 +18 b 2 ŌłÆ4b+8 )ŌłÆ( 3 b 3 +6 b 2 +3b )

11 b 4 ŌłÆ9 b 3 +12 b 2 ŌłÆ7b+8

( 49 p 2 ŌłÆ25 )+( 16 p 4 ŌłÆ32 p 2 +16 )

For the following exercises, find the product.

(4x+2)(6xŌłÆ4)

24 x 2 ŌłÆ4xŌłÆ8

( 14 c 2 +4c )( 2 c 2 ŌłÆ3c )

( 6 b 2 ŌłÆ6 )( 4 b 2 ŌłÆ4 )

24 b 4 ŌłÆ48 b 2 +24

(3dŌłÆ5)(2d+9)

(9vŌłÆ11)(11vŌłÆ9)

99 v 2 ŌłÆ202v+99

( 4 t 2 +7t )( ŌłÆ3 t 2 +4 )

(8nŌłÆ4)( n 2 +9 )

8 n 3 ŌłÆ4 n 2 +72nŌłÆ36

For the following exercises, expand the binomial.

( 4x+5 ) 2

(3yŌłÆ7) 2

9 y 2 ŌłÆ42y+49

(12ŌłÆ4x) 2

( 4p+9 ) 2

16 p 2 +72p+81

(2mŌłÆ3) 2

(3yŌłÆ6) 2

9 y 2 ŌłÆ36y+36

( 9b+1 ) 2

For the following exercises, multiply the binomials.

(4c+1)(4cŌłÆ1)

16 c 2 ŌłÆ1

(9aŌłÆ4)(9a+4)

(15nŌłÆ6)(15n+6)

225 n 2 ŌłÆ36

(25b+2)(25bŌłÆ2)

(4+4m)(4ŌłÆ4m)

ŌłÆ16 m 2 +16

(14p+7)(14pŌłÆ7)

(11qŌłÆ10)(11q+10)

121 q 2 ŌłÆ100

For the following exercises, multiply the polynomials.

( 2 x 2 +2x+1 )(4xŌłÆ1)

( 4 t 2 +tŌłÆ7 )( 4 t 2 ŌłÆ1 )

16 t 4 +4 t 3 ŌłÆ32 t 2 ŌłÆt+7

(xŌłÆ1)( x 2 ŌłÆ2x+1 )

(yŌłÆ2)( y 2 ŌłÆ4yŌłÆ9 )

y 3 ŌłÆ6 y 2 ŌłÆy+18

(6kŌłÆ5)( 6 k 2 +5kŌłÆ1 )

( 3 p 2 +2pŌłÆ10 )(pŌłÆ1)

3 p 3 ŌłÆ p 2 ŌłÆ12p+10

(4mŌłÆ13)( 2 m 2 ŌłÆ7m+9 )

( a+b )( aŌłÆb )

a 2 ŌłÆ b 2

(4xŌłÆ6y)(6xŌłÆ4y)

(4tŌłÆ5u) 2

16 t 2 ŌłÆ40tu+25 u 2

(9m+4nŌłÆ1)(2m+8)

( 4tŌłÆx )( tŌłÆx+1 )

4 t 2 + x 2 +4tŌłÆ5txŌłÆx

( b 2 ŌłÆ1)( a 2 +2ab+ b 2 )

( 4rŌłÆd )( 6r+7d )

24 r 2 +22rdŌłÆ7 d 2

( x+y )( x 2 ŌłÆxy+ y 2 )

## Real-World Applications {#fs-id1167339225725}

A developer wants to purchase a plot of land to build a house. The area
of the plot can be described by the following expression: (4x+1)(8xŌłÆ3)
where *x* is measured in meters. Multiply the binomials to find the area
of the plot in standard form.

32 x 2 ŌłÆ4xŌłÆ3 m2

A prospective buyer wants to know how much grain a specific silo can
hold. The area of the floor of the silo is ( 2x+9 ) 2 . The height of
the silo is 10x+10, where *x* is measured in feet. Expand the square and
multiply by the height to find the expression that shows how much grain
the silo can hold.

## Extensions {#fs-id1167339243059}

For the following exercises, perform the given operations.

(4tŌłÆ7) 2 (2t+1)ŌłÆ( 4 t 2 +2t+11 )

32 t 3 ŌłÆ100 t 2 +40t+38

(3b+6)(3bŌłÆ6)(9 b 2 ŌłÆ36)

( a 2 +4ac+4 c 2 )( a 2 ŌłÆ4 c 2 )

a 4 +4 a 3 cŌłÆ16a c 3 ŌłÆ16 c 4

# 

binomial

a polynomial containing two terms

coefficient

any real number

a

i

in a polynomial in the form

a

n

x

n

\+

\...

\+

a

2

x

2

\+

a

1

x

\+

a

0

degree

the highest power of the variable that occurs in a polynomial

difference of squares

the binomial that results when a binomial is multiplied by a binomial
with the same terms, but the opposite sign

leading coefficient

the coefficient of the leading term

leading term

the term containing the highest degree

monomial

a polynomial containing one term

perfect square trinomial

the trinomial that results when a binomial is squared

polynomial

a sum of terms each consisting of a variable raised to a nonnegative
integer power

term of a polynomial

any

a

i

x

i

of a polynomial in the form

a

n

x

n

\+

\...

\+

a

2

x

2

\+

a

1

x

\+

a

0

trinomial

a polynomial containing three terms
