m51247

> In this section, you will:
>
> Factor the greatest common factor of a polynomial.
>
> Factor a trinomial.
>
> Factor by grouping.
>
> Factor a perfect square trinomial.
>
> Factor a difference of squares.
>
> Factor the sum and difference of cubes.
>
> Factor expressions using fractional or negative exponents.

49cf2d69-1d37-49aa-9e61-16da4c52ce37

#  {#fs-idm1236138016}

## Learning Objectives: {#fs-idm173623296}

Master a proven technique for note taking: The Cornell Method.

Use the Cornell Process to study from your notes.

## Objective 1: Master a proven technique for note taking: The Cornell Method. {#fs-idm361266400}

The Cornell Method for taking notes was created by an education
professor at Cornell University, Dr. Walter Pauk. The Cornell Method
consists of two strategies, a format for notetaking and then the process
of using your notes to study. The format for note taking involves
separating out the pages of your notebook into three or four separate
regions. This method can help summarize information from a lecture, a
video, or a reading from your text. You don't need to purchase Cornell
paper, just divide your sheets into regions like the illustration below.
Write on just one side of the paper so that you can later fold back the
left column and quiz yourself using practice test questions.

The top portion is called the heading. This is where you write your
name, the class, the date, the section of the text and a main topic
objective for the day.

The right section is where you will take notes during class. Try to
summarize main ideas here without copying word for word everything your
teacher is saying. Use bullet points or numbers to prioritize important
ideas. Include here the definitions your teacher presents, and the
examples worked in class. It is useful if you can group the content here
by learning objectives.

The left column about 2 inches wide is used to write questions about the
main concepts that were covered in class. For example, write sample test
questions over the concepts discussed in class in this column. This is
also where you should write cues about the importance of the information
including vocabulary terms, diagrams, formulas or the methods being used
to solve. If you like to sketch this is a place to add illustrations for
key ideas or icons so you can quickly identify certain components.

The summary will be written in the lower section about 2 inches from the
bottom. You will complete this after class summarizing the important
concepts you were taught in a short compact way. Think of this summary
as what you might describe to a friend who happened to miss class that
day. Reflect on the important ideas here. Add illustrations or a mind
map to your summary if this helps. You will use this section to find
information later when studying.

<figure id="cornell">

</figure>

### Practice Makes Perfect {#eip-527}

The following book section includes a variety of methods for factoring
polynomials. Read the section carefully and complete Cornell notes for
the *process of factoring*. This work will help you throughout the
semester because the ability to factor polynomials is one of those
linchpin topics that will continue to emerge throughout the term.
Remember to write practice factoring examples in the left question or
cues column.

Need some inspiration? Search for videos on Cornell note taking on the
web. There are some interesting videos of students showing off their
beautiful notes that have been enhanced with highlighters and sketches.
Many of the students talk about the difference this technique has made
in their learning and attribute their success to this Cornell format.
Another topic to search is sketchnoting, which helps to visually enhance
your Cornell notes and truly tell a story.

## Objective 2: Use the Cornell Process to study from your notes. {#fs-idm361677920}

*The Cornell Way*. Using your Cornell notes to study is referred to as
the Cornell Way. The process includes Cornell note taking (presented in
Objective 1), note making, note interacting, and note reflecting. After
taking notes in class, follow up with these study methods.

*Note making*: This is where you will fill in any gaps left in your
Cornell notes meaning add in any missed details. Fill in your question
column with sample test questions, any formulas used, and highlight,
circle or star important any important ideas. Complete your summary row
with a few sentences summarizing the important ideas. This should be
completed right after class or within the next day. Be creative and add
some color, make these notes into something you enjoy working with.

*Note interacting*: This is the ongoing process of studying from your
notes. Fold your left question column back and ask yourself the practice
test questions. Include note interactions in the review for your exams.
These note interactions can be as short as 5 minutes in length but need
to happen regularly and at least daily for the week before exams.

*Note reflecting*: This is where you assess how helpful your notes were.
Do this right after you get back your graded exam. Did the regular note
interactions help you to perform better on the exam? Were there problems
similar to those you predicted on the exam? Enhance your notes with any
important ideas you had initially left out. Then use what you learn from
this assessment to improve your note taking in the future.

### Practice Makes Perfect {#eip-528}

Complete the Cornell Process by revisiting your factoring of polynomials
summary notes. For now, follow the Note Making, and Note Interacting
steps outlined above. Keep these Cornell notes in your divided binder
for the course so you can easily refer back when you encounter an
exercise requiring factoring throughout the term.

Share these completed Cornell notes with your classmates. Fill in any
gaps in your work. Work on each other's practice problems.

Imagine that we are trying to find the area of a lawn so that we can
determine how much grass seed to purchase. The lawn is the green portion
in [\#](#).

<figure id="Figure_01_05_001">

</figure>

The area of the entire region can be found using the formula for the
area of a rectangle.

$$\begin{array}{ccl}
A & = & {lw} \\
 & = & {10x \cdot 6x} \\
 & = & {60x^{2}{\mspace{9mu}\text{units}}^{2}}
\end{array}$$

The areas of the portions that do not require grass seed need to be
subtracted from the area of the entire region. The two square regions
each have an area of A= s 2 = 4 2 =16 units2. The other rectangular
region has one side of length 10x−8 and one side of length 4, giving an
area of A=lw=4(10x−8)=40x−32 units2. So the region that must be
subtracted has an area of 2(16)+40x−32=40x units2.

The area of the region that requires grass seed is found by subtracting
60 x 2 −40x units2. This area can also be expressed in factored form as
20x(3x−2) units2. We can confirm that this is an equivalent expression
by multiplying.

Many polynomial expressions can be written in simpler forms by
factoring. In this section, we will look at a variety of methods that
can be used to factor polynomial expressions.

# Factoring the Greatest Common Factor of a Polynomial {#fs-id1167339224262}

When we study fractions, we learn that the greatest common factor (GCF)
of two numbers is the largest number that divides evenly into both
numbers. For instance, 4 is the GCF of 16 and 20 because it is the
largest number that divides evenly into both 16 and 20 The GCF of
polynomials works the same way: 4x is the GCF of 16x and 20 x 2 because
it is the largest polynomial that divides evenly into both 16x and 20 x
2 .

When factoring a polynomial expression, our first step should be to
check for a GCF. Look for the GCF of the coefficients, and then look for
the GCF of the variables.

:::: {#fs-id1167339144723 .note}
::: title
Greatest Common Factor
:::

The greatest common factor (GCF) of polynomials is the largest
polynomial that divides evenly into the polynomials.
::::

:::: {#fs-id1167339220518 .note}
::: title
:::

How To

*Given a polynomial expression, factor out the greatest common factor.*

Identify the GCF of the coefficients.

Identify the GCF of the variables.

Combine to find the GCF of the expression.

Determine what the GCF needs to be multiplied by to obtain each term in
the expression.

Write the factored expression as the product of the GCF and the sum of
the terms we need to multiply by.
::::

::: {#Example_01_05_01 .example}
Factor 6 x 3 y 3 +45 x 2 y 2 +21xy.

First, find the GCF of the expression. The GCF of 6, 45, and 21 is 3.
The GCF of x 3 , x 2 , and x is x . (Note that the GCF of a set of
expressions in the form x n will always be the exponent of lowest
degree.) And the GCF of y 3 , y 2 , and y is y . Combine these to find
the GCF of the polynomial, 3xy .

Next, determine what the GCF needs to be multiplied by to obtain each
term of the polynomial. We find that 3xy(2 x 2 y 2 )=6 x 3 y 3
,3xy(15xy)=45 x 2 y 2 , and 3xy(7)=21xy.

Finally, write the factored expression as the product of the GCF and the
sum of the terms we needed to multiply by.

$$(3xy)\left( 2x^{2}y^{2} + 15xy + 7 \right)$$

After factoring, we can check our work by multiplying. Use the
distributive property to confirm that (3xy)(2 x 2 y 2 +15xy+7)=6 x 3 y 3
+45 x 2 y 2 +21xy.
:::

:::: {#fs-id1167339144942 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Factor x( b 2 −a)+6( b 2 −a) by pulling out the GCF.

( b 2 −a)(x+6)
::::

# Factoring a Trinomial with Leading Coefficient 1 {#fs-id1167339432992}

Although we should always begin by looking for a GCF, pulling out the
GCF is not the only way that polynomial expressions can be factored. The
polynomial x 2 +5x+6 has a GCF of 1, but it can be written as the
product of the factors (x+2) and (x+3).

Trinomials of the form x 2 +bx+c can be factored by finding two numbers
with a product of c and a sum of b. The trinomial x 2 +10x+16, for
example, can be factored using the numbers 2 and 8 because the product
of those numbers is 16 and their sum is 10. The trinomial can be
rewritten as the product of (x+2) and (x+8).

:::: {#fs-id1167339149443 .note}
::: title
Factoring a Trinomial with Leading Coefficient 1
:::

A trinomial of the form x 2 +bx+c can be written in factored form as
(x+p)(x+q) where pq=c and p+q=b.
::::

:::: {#fs-id1167339213779 .note}
::: title
:::

Q&A

*Can every trinomial be factored as a product of binomials?*

*No. Some polynomials cannot be factored. These polynomials are said to
be prime.*
::::

:::: {#fs-id1167339157766 .note}
::: title
:::

How To

*Given a trinomial in the form x 2 +bx+c, factor it.*

List factors of

c

.

Find

p

and

q

,

a pair of factors of

c

with a sum of

b

.

Write the factored expression

(

x

\+

p

)

(

x

\+

q

)

.
::::

::: {#Example_01_05_02 .example}
Factor x 2 +2x−15.

We have a trinomial with leading coefficient 1,b=2, and c=−15. We need
to find two numbers with a product of −15 and a sum of 2. In the table
below, we list factors until we find a pair with the desired sum.

  Factors of −15   Sum of Factors
  ---------------- ----------------
  1,−15            −14
  −1,15            14
  3,−5             −2
  −3,5             2

Now that we have identified p and q as −3 and 5, write the factored form
as (x−3)(x+5).

We can check our work by multiplying. Use FOIL to confirm that
(x−3)(x+5)= x 2 +2x−15.
:::

:::: {#fs-id1167339328852 .note}
::: title
:::

Q&A

*Does the order of the factors matter?*

*No. Multiplication is commutative, so the order of the factors does not
matter.*
::::

:::: {#fs-id1167339261843 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Factor x 2 −7x+6.

(x−6)(x−1)
::::

# Factoring by Grouping {#fs-id1167339220936}

Trinomials with leading coefficients other than 1 are slightly more
complicated to factor. For these trinomials, we can factor by grouping
by dividing the *x* term into the sum of two terms, factoring each
portion of the expression separately, and then factoring out the GCF of
the entire expression. The trinomial 2 x 2 +5x+3 can be rewritten as
(2x+3)(x+1) using this process. We begin by rewriting the original
expression as 2 x 2 +2x+3x+3 and then factor each portion of the
expression to obtain 2x(x+1)+3(x+1). We then pull out the GCF of (x+1)
to find the factored expression.

:::: {#fs-id1167339324878 .note}
::: title
Factor by Grouping
:::

To factor a trinomial in the form a x 2 +bx+c by grouping, we find two
numbers with a product of ac and a sum of b. We use these numbers to
divide the x term into the sum of two terms and factor each portion of
the expression separately, then factor out the GCF of the entire
expression.
::::

:::: {#fs-id1167339318193 .note}
::: title
:::

How To

Given a trinomial in the form

a

x

2

\+

b

x

\+

c

,

factor by grouping.

List factors of

a

c

.

Find

p

and

q

,

a pair of factors of

a

c

with a sum of

b

.

Rewrite the original expression as

a

x

2

\+

p

x

\+

q

x

\+

c

.

Pull out the GCF of

a

x

2

\+

p

x

.

Pull out the GCF of

q

x

\+

c

.

Factor out the GCF of the expression.
::::

::: {#Example_01_05_03 .example}
Factor 5 x 2 +7x−6 by grouping.

We have a trinomial with a=5,b=7, and c=−6. First, determine ac=−30. We
need to find two numbers with a product of −30 and a sum of 7. In the
table below, we list factors until we find a pair with the desired sum.

  Factors of −30   Sum of Factors
  ---------------- ----------------
  1,−30            −29
  −1,30            29
  2,−15            −13
  −2,15            13
  3,−10            −7
  −3,10            7

So p=−3 and q=10.

$$\begin{array}{ll}
{5x^{2} - 3x + 10x - 6~} & {\qquad\text{Rewrite~the~original~expression~as~}ax^{2} + px + qx + c.} \\
{x(5x - 3) + 2(5x - 3)} & {\qquad\text{Factor~out~the~GCF~of~each~part}.} \\
{(5x - 3)(x + 2)} & {\qquad\text{Factor~out~the~GCF}\mspace{9mu}\text{of~the~expression}.}
\end{array}$$

We can check our work by multiplying. Use FOIL to confirm that
(5x−3)(x+2)=5 x 2 +7x−6.
:::

:::: {#fs-id1167339138014 .note}
::: title
:::

Factor ⓐ 2 x 2 +9x+9 ⓑ 6 x 2 +x−1

ⓐ (2x+3)(x+3) ⓑ ( 3x−1 )( 2x+1 )
::::

# Factoring a Perfect Square Trinomial {#fs-id1167339300231}

A perfect square trinomial is a trinomial that can be written as the
square of a binomial. Recall that when a binomial is squared, the result
is the square of the first term added to twice the product of the two
terms and the square of the last term.

$$\begin{matrix}
{a^{2} + 2ab + b^{2}} & = & {(a + b)}^{2} \\
 & \text{and} & \\
{a^{2} - 2ab + b^{2}} & = & {(a - b)}^{2}
\end{matrix}$$

We can use this equation to factor any perfect square trinomial.

:::: {#fs-id1167339158176 .note}
::: title
Perfect Square Trinomials
:::

A perfect square trinomial can be written as the square of a binomial:

$$a^{2} + 2ab + b^{2} = {(a + b)}^{2}$$
::::

:::: {#fs-id1167339168210 .note}
::: title
:::

How To

*Given a perfect square trinomial, factor it into the square of a
binomial.*

Confirm that the first and last term are perfect squares.

Confirm that the middle term is twice the product of

a

b

.

Write the factored form as

(

a

\+

b

)

2

.
::::

::: {#Example_01_05_04 .example}
Factor 25 x 2 +20x+4.

Notice that 25 x 2 and 4 are perfect squares because 25 x 2 = (5x) 2 and
4= 2 2 . Then check to see if the middle term is twice the product of 5x
and 2. The middle term is, indeed, twice the product: 2(5x)(2)=20x.
Therefore, the trinomial is a perfect square trinomial and can be
written as (5x+2) 2 .
:::

:::: {#fs-id1167339212449 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Factor 49 x 2 −14x+1.

(7x−1) 2
::::

# Factoring a Difference of Squares {#fs-id1167339344862}

A difference of squares is a perfect square subtracted from a perfect
square. Recall that a difference of squares can be rewritten as factors
containing the same terms but opposite signs because the middle terms
cancel each other out when the two factors are multiplied.

$$a^{2} - b^{2} = (a + b)(a - b)$$

We can use this equation to factor any differences of squares.

:::: {#fs-id1167339139367 .note}
::: title
Differences of Squares
:::

A difference of squares can be rewritten as two factors containing the
same terms but opposite signs.

$$a^{2} - b^{2} = (a + b)(a - b)$$
::::

:::: {#fs-id1167339243070 .note}
::: title
:::

How To

*Given a difference of squares, factor it into binomials.*

Confirm that the first and last term are perfect squares.

Write the factored form as

(

a

\+

b

)

(

a

−

b

)

.
::::

::: {#Example_01_05_05 .example}
Factor 9 x 2 −25.

Notice that 9 x 2 and 25 are perfect squares because 9 x 2 = (3x) 2 and
25= 5 2 . The polynomial represents a difference of squares and can be
rewritten as (3x+5)(3x−5).
:::

:::: {#fs-id1167339432780 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Factor 81 y 2 −100.

(9y+10)(9y−10)
::::

:::: {#fs-id1167339240123 .note}
::: title
:::

Q&A

*Is there a formula to factor the sum of squares?*

*No. A sum of squares cannot be factored.*
::::

# Factoring the Sum and Difference of Cubes {#fs-id1167339281638}

Now, we will look at two new special products: the sum and difference of
cubes. Although the sum of squares cannot be factored, the sum of cubes
can be factored into a binomial and a trinomial.

$$a^{3} + b^{3} = (a + b)\left( {a^{2} - ab + b^{2}} \right)$$

Similarly, the difference of cubes can be factored into a binomial and a
trinomial, but with different signs.

$$a^{3} - b^{3} = (a - b)\left( {a^{2} + ab + b^{2}} \right)$$

We can use the acronym SOAP to remember the signs when factoring the sum
or difference of cubes. The first letter of each word relates to the
signs: *S*ame *O*pposite *A*lways *P*ositive. For example, consider the
following example.

$$x^{3} - 2^{3} = (x - 2)\left( {x^{2} + 2x + 4} \right)$$

The sign of the first 2 is the *same* as the sign between x 3 − 2 3 .
The sign of the 2x term is *opposite* the sign between x 3 − 2 3 . And
the sign of the last term, 4, is *always positive*.

:::: {#fs-id1167339281550 .note}
::: title
Sum and Difference of Cubes
:::

We can factor the sum of two cubes as

$$a^{3} + b^{3} = (a + b)\left( {a^{2} - ab + b^{2}} \right)$$

We can factor the difference of two cubes as

$$a^{3} - b^{3} = (a - b)\left( {a^{2} + ab + b^{2}} \right)$$
::::

:::: {#fs-id1167339324784 .note}
::: title
:::

How To

*Given a sum of cubes or difference of cubes, factor it.*

Confirm that the first and last term are cubes,

a

3

\+

b

3

or

a

3

−

b

3

.

For a sum of cubes, write the factored form as

(

a

\+

b

)

(

a

2

−

a

b

\+

b

2

)

.

For a difference of cubes, write the factored form as

(

a

−

b

)

(

a

2

\+

a

b

\+

b

2

)

.
::::

::: {#Example_01_05_06 .example}
Factor x 3 +512.

Notice that x 3 and 512 are cubes because 8 3 =512. Rewrite the sum of
cubes as (x+8)( x 2 −8x+64).

After writing the sum of cubes this way, we might think we should check
to see if the trinomial portion can be factored further. However, the
trinomial portion cannot be factored, so we do not need to check.
:::

:::: {#fs-id1167339243153 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Factor the sum of cubes: 216 a 3 + b 3 .

(6a+b)(36 a 2 −6ab+ b 2 )
::::

::: {#Example_01_05_07 .example}
Factor 8 x 3 −125.

Notice that 8 x 3 and 125 are cubes because 8 x 3 = (2x) 3 and 125= 5 3
. Write the difference of cubes as (2x−5)(4 x 2 +10x+25).

Just as with the sum of cubes, we will not be able to further factor the
trinomial portion.
:::

:::: {#fs-id1167339259671 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Factor the difference of cubes: 1,000 x 3 −1.

(10x−1)( 100 x 2 +10x+1 )
::::

# Factoring Expressions with Fractional or Negative Exponents {#fs-id1167339432601}

Expressions with fractional or negative exponents can be factored by
pulling out a GCF. Look for the variable or exponent that is common to
each term of the expression and pull out that variable or exponent
raised to the lowest power. These expressions follow the same factoring
rules as those with integer exponents. For instance, 2 x 1 4 +5 x 3 4
can be factored by pulling out x 1 4 and being rewritten as x 1 4 (2+5 x
1 2 ).

::: {#Example_01_05_08 .example}
Factor 3x (x+2) −1 3 +4 (x+2) 2 3 .

Factor out the term with the lowest value of the exponent. In this case,
that would be ( x+2 ) − 1 3 .

$$\begin{array}{lc}
{{(x + 2)}^{- \frac{1}{3}}(3x + 4(x + 2))} & {\qquad\text{Factor~out~the~GCF}.} \\
{{(x + 2)}^{- \frac{1}{3}}(3x + 4x + 8)} & {\qquad\text{Simplify}.} \\
{{(x + 2)}^{- \frac{1}{3}}(7x + 8)} & 
\end{array}$$
:::

:::: {#fs-id1167339309570 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Factor 2 (5a−1) 3 4 +7a (5a−1) − 1 4 .

(5a−1) − 1 4 (17a−2)
::::

:::: {#fs-id1167339306561 .note}
::: title
:::

Media

Access these online resources for additional instruction and practice
with factoring polynomials.

Identify GCF

Factor Trinomials when a Equals 1

Factor Trinomials when a is not equal to 1

Factor Sum or Difference of Cubes
::::

# Key Equations {#fs-id1167339306605}

  -------------------------- ----------------------------------
  difference of squares      a 2 − b 2 =(a+b)(a−b)
  perfect square trinomial   a 2 +2ab+ b 2 = (a+b) 2
  sum of cubes               a 3 + b 3 =(a+b)( a 2 −ab+ b 2 )
  difference of cubes        a 3 − b 3 =(a−b)( a 2 +ab+ b 2 )
  -------------------------- ----------------------------------

#  {#fs-id1167339199496}

The greatest common factor, or GCF, can be factored out of a polynomial.
Checking for a GCF should be the first step in any factoring problem.
See

.

Trinomials with leading coefficient 1 can be factored by finding numbers
that have a product of the third term and a sum of the second term. See

.

Trinomials can be factored using a process called factoring by grouping.
See

.

Perfect square trinomials and the difference of squares are special
products and can be factored using equations. See

and

.

The sum of cubes and the difference of cubes can be factored using
equations. See

and

.

Polynomials containing fractional and negative exponents can be factored
by pulling out a GCF. See

.

# Section Exercises {#fs-id1167339220212}

## Verbal {#fs-id1167339220216}

If the terms of a polynomial do not have a GCF, does that mean it is not
factorable? Explain.

The terms of a polynomial do not have to have a common factor for the
entire polynomial to be factorable. For example, 4 x 2 and −9 y 2 don't
have a common factor, but the whole polynomial is still factorable: 4 x
2 −9 y 2 =( 2x+3y )( 2x−3y ).

A polynomial is factorable, but it is not a perfect square trinomial or
a difference of two squares. Can you factor the polynomial without
finding the GCF?

How do you factor by grouping?

Divide the x term into the sum of two terms, factor each portion of the
expression separately, and then factor out the GCF of the entire
expression.

## Algebraic {#fs-id1167339226337}

For the following exercises, find the greatest common factor.

14x+4xy−18x y 2

49m b 2 −35 m 2 ba+77m a 2

7m

30 x 3 y−45 x 2 y 2 +135x y 3

200 p 3 m 3 −30 p 2 m 3 +40 m 3

10 m 3

36 j 4 k 2 −18 j 3 k 3 +54 j 2 k 4

6 y 4 −2 y 3 +3 y 2 −y

y

For the following exercises, factor by grouping.

6 x 2 +5x−4

2 a 2 +9a−18

( 2a−3 )( a+6 )

6 c 2 +41c+63

6 n 2 −19n−11

( 3n−11 )( 2n+1 )

20 w 2 −47w+24

2 p 2 −5p−7

( p+1 )( 2p−7 )

For the following exercises, factor the polynomial.

7 x 2 +48x−7

10 h 2 −9h−9

( 5h+3 )( 2h−3 )

2 b 2 −25b−247

9 d 2 −73d+8

( 9d−1 )( d−8 )

90 v 2 −181v+90

12 t 2 +t−13

( 12t+13 )( t−1 )

2 n 2 −n−15

16 x 2 −100

(4x+10)(4x−10)

25 y 2 −196

121 p 2 −169

(11p+13)(11p−13)

4 m 2 −9

361 d 2 −81

(19d+9)(19d−9)

324 x 2 −121

144 b 2 −25 c 2

(12b+5c)(12b−5c)

16 a 2 −8a+1

49 n 2 +168n+144

( 7n+12 ) 2

121 x 2 −88x+16

225 y 2 +120y+16

( 15y+4 ) 2

m 2 −20m+100

25 p 2 −120p+144

(5p−12) 2

36 q 2 +60q+25

For the following exercises, factor the polynomials.

x 3 +216

(x+6)( x 2 −6x+36)

27 y 3 −8

125 a 3 +343

(5a+7)(25 a 2 −35a+49)

b 3 −8 d 3

64 x 3 −125

(4x−5)(16 x 2 +20x+25)

729 q 3 +1331

125 r 3 +1,728 s 3

(5r+12s)(25 r 2 −60rs+144 s 2 )

4x ( x−1 ) − 2 3 +3 ( x−1 ) 1 3

3c ( 2c+3 ) − 1 4 −5 ( 2c+3 ) 3 4

( 2c+3 ) − 1 4 ( −7c−15 )

3t ( 10t+3 ) 1 3 +7 ( 10t+3 ) 4 3

14x ( x+2 ) − 2 5 +5 ( x+2 ) 3 5

( x+2 ) − 2 5 ( 19x+10 )

9y (3y−13) 1 5 −2 (3y−13) 6 5

5z (2z−9) − 3 2 +11 (2z−9) − 1 2

( 2z−9 ) − 3 2 ( 27z−99 )

6d ( 2d+3 ) − 1 6 +5 ( 2d+3 ) 5 6

## Real-World Applications {#fs-id1167339315800}

For the following exercises, consider this scenario:

Charlotte has appointed a chairperson to lead a city beautification
project. The first act is to install statues and fountains in one of the
city's parks. The park is a rectangle with an area of 98 x 2 +105x−27
m2, as shown in the figure below. The length and width of the park are
perfect factors of the area.

Factor by grouping to find the length and width of the park.

( 14x−3 )( 7x+9 )

A statue is to be placed in the center of the park. The area of the base
of the statue is 4 x 2 +12x+9  m 2 . Factor the area to find the lengths
of the sides of the statue.

At the northwest corner of the park, the city is going to install a
fountain. The area of the base of the fountain is 9 x 2 −25  m 2 .
Factor the area to find the lengths of the sides of the fountain.

( 3x+5 )( 3x−5 )

For the following exercise, consider the following scenario:

A school is installing a flagpole in the central plaza. The plaza is a
square with side length 100 yd. as shown in the figure below. The
flagpole will take up a square plot with area x 2 −6x+9 yd2.

Find the length of the base of the flagpole by factoring.

## Extensions {#fs-id1167339239363}

For the following exercises, factor the polynomials completely.

16 x 4 −200 x 2 +625

(2x+5) 2 (2x−5) 2

81 y 4 −256

16 z 4 −2,401 a 4

(4 z 2 +49 a 2 )(2z+7a)(2z−7a)

5x ( 3x+2 ) − 2 4 + ( 12x+8 ) 3 2

(32 x 3 +48 x 2 −162x−243) −1

1 ( 4x+9 )( 4x−9 )( 2x+3 )

# 

factor by grouping

a method for factoring a trinomial in the form

a

x

2

\+

b

x

\+

c

by dividing the

x

term into the sum of two terms, factoring each portion of the expression
separately, and then factoring out the GCF of the entire expression

greatest common factor

the largest polynomial that divides evenly into each polynomial
