m51248

> In this section, you will:
>
> Simplify rational expressions.
>
> Multiply rational expressions.
>
> Divide rational expressions.
>
> Add and subtract rational expressions.
>
> Simplify complex rational expressions.

45953190-e727-41e0-9e6a-834e092ee148

#  {#eip-754}

## Learning Objectives {#eip-75}

Identify the skills leading to successful preparation for a college
level mathematics exam.

Create a plan for success when taking mathematics exams.

## Objective 1: Identify the skills leading to successful preparation for a college level mathematics exam. {#eip-623}

Complete the following surveys by placing a checkmark in the a column
for each strategy based on the frequency that you engaged in the
strategy during your last academic term.

  Exam Preparation Strategies                                                                                                                                                                                        Always   Sometimes   Never
  ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ -------- ----------- -------
  1\. Rework each of the examples my instructor did in class.                                                                                                                                                                             
  2\. Create note cards to help in memorizing important formulas and problem-solving strategies for the exam.                                                                                                                             
  3\. Create a study schedule for each math exam and begin to study for the exam at least one week prior to the date. Spaced practice over 5-7 days is much more effective than cramming material in 1-2 sessions.                        
  4\. Work the review exercises at the end of each chapter of the text.                                                                                                                                                                   
  5\. Visit my instructor's office hours when I need assistance in preparing for an exam.                                                                                                                                                 
  6\. Spend time on note interactions (see the [section](#) on Cornell notes) each day.                                                                                                                                                   
  7\. Create a practice test using the questions I identified in my class notes (see the [section](#) on Cornell notes) and take it the week before the exam.                                                                             
  8\. Review each of the student learning objectives at the beginning of all sections covered on the exam and use this list as a checklist for exam preparation.                                                                          
  9\. Ask your instructor how many questions will be on the exam and if they award partial credit for work shown.                                                                                                                         
  10\. Work through the practice test at the end of each chapter of the text.                                                                                                                                                             
  11\. Get a good night's sleep the night before my exam.                                                                                                                                                                                 
  12\. Come to each exam prepared with a goal of earning an A.                                                                                                                                                                            

  Exam Day Behaviors and Strategies                                                                                                                         Always   Sometimes   Never
  --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- -------- ----------- -------
  13\. Make sure to grab a healthy breakfast the day of the exam.                                                                                                                
  14\. Arrive or log in early to class on exam days.                                                                                                                             
  15\. Keep my phone put away in my bag during exams to avoid distractions.                                                                                                      
  16\. Try to relax and take a few deep breaths before beginning the exam.                                                                                                       
  17\. Use a pencil so that I can make corrections neatly.                                                                                                                       
  18\. Read through all directions before beginning the exam.                                                                                                                    
  19\. Write formulas that are memorized in the margins, top or back of the test to reference when needed.                                                                       
  20\. Scan through my entire test before beginning and start off working on a problem I am confident in solving.                                                                
  21\. Work each of the questions that I find easier first.                                                                                                                      
  22\. Keep track of time. Do a quick assessment of how much time should be spent on each question.                                                                              
  23\. Try different approaches to solve when I get stuck on a problem.                                                                                                          
  24\. Draw a diagram when solving an application problem.                                                                                                                       
  25\. Do some work on each question.                                                                                                                                            
  26\. Work neatly and show all steps.                                                                                                                                           
  27\. Make sure to attach units to final answers when units are given in the problem. (for example: cm, \$, or feet/second)                                                     
  28\. Stay working for the entire class session or online exam session. If finished early I use the additional time to review my work and check answers.                        
  29\. Circle final answers or write each on the answer blank.                                                                                                                   

  After the Exam Behaviors and Strategies                                                                                                      Always   Sometimes   Never
  -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- -------- ----------- -------
  30\. I work back through my exams after they are returned, writing corrections in another color or highlighting them for future reference.                        
  31\. Keep my old exams in a binder or notebook and use this assessment to review for my final exam.                                                               
  32\. Take responsibility for my exam performance and try to learn from the experience.                                                                            
  33\. Reflect on the test taking experience and make a list for yourself on what to do differently next time.                                                      
  34\. Reflect on your feelings while taking the exam. Plan to replace any negative self-statements with positive ones on future exams.                             
  35\. Celebrate my success after doing well on an exam! Talk to a friend or family member about my progress.                                                       

+--------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Scoring                                                            |
+--------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Total Number in Each Column                                        |
+=================+================+================+================+
| *Scoring:*      | *Always: 4     | *Sometimes: 2  | *Never: 0      |
|                 | points each*   | points each*   | points each*   |
+-----------------+----------------+----------------+----------------+
| *Total points:* |                |                | *0*            |
+-----------------+----------------+----------------+----------------+

### Practice Makes Perfect {#eip-405}

*Practice*: Identify the skills leading to successful preparation for a
college level mathematics exam.

Each of the behaviors or attitudes listed in the table above are
associated with successful college mathematics exam preparation. This
means that students who use these strategies or are open to these
beliefs pass their college math courses. Compute your total score and
share your score with your study group in class. Be supportive of your
fellow students and offer encouragement!

Total score =\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

Based on this survey, create a list of the top 5 test preparation and
taking strategies that you currently utilize, and feel are most helpful
to you.

Based on this survey, create a list of the top 5 test preparation and
taking strategies that interest you, and that you feel could be most
helpful to you this term. Plan on implementing these strategies.

## Objective 2: Create a plan for success when taking mathematics exams. {#eip-600}

It's important to take the opportunity to reflect on your past
experiences in taking math exams as you begin a new term. We can learn a
lot from these reflections and thus work toward developing a strategy
for improvement.

In the table below list 5 challenges you have had in past math courses
when taking an exam and list a possible solution that you could try this
semester.

  Challenge:             Possible Solution:
  ---------------------- --------------------
  1\. \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_   
  2\. \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_   
  3\. \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_   
  4\. \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_   
  5\. \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_   

Develop your plan for success. Keep in mind the idea of mindsets and try
to approach your test taking strategies with a growth mindset. Now is
the time for growth as you begin a new term. Share your plan with your
study group members.

A pastry shop has fixed costs of \$280 per week and variable costs of
\$9 per box of pastries. The shop's costs per week in terms of x, the
number of boxes made, is 280+9x. We can divide the costs per week by the
number of boxes made to determine the cost per box of pastries.

$$\frac{280 + 9x}{x}$$

Notice that the result is a polynomial expression divided by a second
polynomial expression. In this section, we will explore quotients of
polynomial expressions.

# Simplifying Rational Expressions {#fs-id1167339317968}

The quotient of two polynomial expressions is called a rational
expression. We can apply the properties of fractions to rational
expressions, such as simplifying the expressions by canceling common
factors from the numerator and the denominator. To do this, we first
need to factor both the numerator and denominator. Let's start with the
rational expression shown.

$$\frac{x^{2} + 8x + 16}{x^{2} + 11x + 28}$$

We can factor the numerator and denominator to rewrite the expression.

$$\frac{{(x + 4)}^{2}}{(x + 4)(x + 7)}$$

Then we can simplify that expression by canceling the common factor (
x+4 ).

$$\frac{x + 4}{x + 7}$$

:::: {#fs-id1167339281673 .note}
::: title
:::

How To

*Given a rational expression, simplify it.*

Factor the numerator and denominator.

Cancel any common factors.
::::

::: {#Example_01_06_01 .example}
Simplify x 2 ŌłÆ9 x 2 +4x+3 .

$$\begin{array}{lllll}
\frac{(x + 3)(x - 3)}{(x + 3)(x + 1)} & & & & {\text{Factor~the~numerator~and~the~denominator}.} \\
\frac{x - 3}{x + 1} & & & & {\text{Cancel~common~factor~}(x + 3).}
\end{array}$$

We can cancel the common factor because any expression divided by itself
is equal to 1.
:::

:::: {#fs-id1167339324584 .note}
::: title
:::

Q&A

*Can the x 2 term be cancelled in [\#](#)?*

*No. A factor is an expression that is multiplied by another expression.
The x 2 term is not a factor of the numerator or the denominator.*
::::

:::: {#fs-id1167339154122 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Simplify xŌłÆ6 x 2 ŌłÆ36 .

1 x+6
::::

# Multiplying Rational Expressions {#fs-id1167339165929}

Multiplication of rational expressions works the same way as
multiplication of any other fractions. We multiply the numerators to
find the numerator of the product, and then multiply the denominators to
find the denominator of the product. Before multiplying, it is helpful
to factor the numerators and denominators just as we did when
simplifying rational expressions. We are often able to simplify the
product of rational expressions.

:::: {#fs-id1167339185386 .note}
::: title
:::

How To

*Given two rational expressions, multiply them.*

Factor the numerator and denominator.

Multiply the numerators.

Multiply the denominators.

Simplify.
::::

::: {#Example_01_06_02 .example}
Multiply the rational expressions and show the product in simplest form:

$$\frac{x^{2} + 4x - 5}{3x + 18} \cdot \frac{2x - 1}{x + 5}$$

$$\begin{array}{lllll}
{\frac{(x + 5)(x - 1)}{3(x + 6)} \cdot \frac{(2x - 1)}{(x + 5)}} & & & & {\text{Factor~the~numerator~and~denominator}.} \\
\frac{(x + 5)(x - 1)(2x - 1)}{3(x + 6)(x + 5)} & & & & {\text{Multiply~numerators~and~denominators}.} \\
\frac{\cancel{(x + 5)}(x - 1)(2x - 1)}{3(x + 6)\cancel{(x + 5)}} & & & & {\text{Cancel~common~factors~to~simplify}.} \\
{\frac{(x - 1)(2x - 1)}{3(x + 6)}~} & & & & 
\end{array}$$
:::

:::: {#fs-id1167339281579 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Multiply the rational expressions and show the product in simplest form:

$$\frac{x^{2} + 11x + 30}{x^{2} + 5x + 6} \cdot \frac{x^{2} + 7x + 12}{x^{2} + 8x + 16}$$

(x+5)(x+6) (x+2)(x+4)
::::

# Dividing Rational Expressions {#fs-id1167339281343}

Division of rational expressions works the same way as division of other
fractions. To divide a rational expression by another rational
expression, multiply the first expression by the reciprocal of the
second. Using this approach, we would rewrite 1 x ├Ę x 2 3 as the product
1 x Ōŗģ 3 x 2 . Once the division expression has been rewritten as a
multiplication expression, we can multiply as we did before.

$$\frac{1}{x} \cdot \frac{3}{x^{2}} = \frac{3}{x^{3}}$$

:::: {#fs-id1167339117616 .note}
::: title
:::

How To

*Given two rational expressions, divide them.*

Rewrite as the first rational expression multiplied by the reciprocal of
the second.

Factor the numerators and denominators.

Multiply the numerators.

Multiply the denominators.

Simplify.
::::

::: {#Example_01_06_03 .example}
Divide the rational expressions and express the quotient in simplest
form:

$$\frac{2x^{2} + x - 6}{x^{2} - 1} \div \frac{x^{2} - 4}{x^{2} + 2x + 1}$$

$$\begin{array}{ll}
{\frac{2x^{2} + x - 6}{x^{2} - 1} \cdot \frac{x^{2} + 2x + 1}{x^{2} - 4}} & {\qquad\text{Rewrite as multiplication.}} \\
{\frac{(2x - 3)(x + 2)}{(x + 1)(x - 1)} \cdot \frac{(x + 1)^{2}}{(x + 2)(x - 2)}} & {\qquad\text{Factor.}} \\
\frac{(2x - 3)(x + 2)(x + 1)^{2}}{(x + 1)(x - 1)(x + 2)(x - 2)} & {\qquad\text{Multiply.}} \\
\frac{(2x - 3)(x + 1)}{(x - 1)(x - 2)} & {\qquad\text{Cancel common factors to simplify.}}
\end{array}$$
:::

:::: {#fs-id1167339137930 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Divide the rational expressions and express the quotient in simplest
form:

$$\frac{9x^{2} - 16}{3x^{2} + 17x - 28} \div \frac{3x^{2} - 2x - 8}{x^{2} + 5x - 14}$$

1
::::

# Adding and Subtracting Rational Expressions {#fs-id1167339429240}

Adding and subtracting rational expressions works just like adding and
subtracting numerical fractions. To add fractions, we need to find a
common denominator. Let's look at an example of fraction addition.

$$\begin{array}{ccl}
{\frac{5}{24} + \frac{1}{40}} & = & {\frac{25}{120} + \frac{3}{120}} \\
 & = & \frac{28}{120} \\
 & = & \frac{7}{30}
\end{array}$$

We have to rewrite the fractions so they share a common denominator
before we are able to add. We must do the same thing when adding or
subtracting rational expressions.

The easiest common denominator to use will be the least common
denominator, or LCD. The LCD is the smallest multiple that the
denominators have in common. To find the LCD of two rational
expressions, we factor the expressions and multiply all of the distinct
factors. For instance, if the factored denominators were (x+3)(x+4) and
(x+4)(x+5), then the LCD would be (x+3)(x+4)(x+5).

Once we find the LCD, we need to multiply each expression by the form of
1 that will change the denominator to the LCD. We would need to multiply
the expression with a denominator of (x+3)(x+4) by x+5 x+5 and the
expression with a denominator of (x+4)(x+5) by x+3 x+3 .

:::: {#fs-id1167339231542 .note}
::: title
:::

How To

*Given two rational expressions, add or subtract them.*

Factor the numerator and denominator.

Find the LCD of the expressions.

Multiply the expressions by a form of 1 that changes the denominators to
the LCD.

Add or subtract the numerators.

Simplify.
::::

::: {#Example_01_06_04 .example}
Add the rational expressions:

$$\frac{5}{x} + \frac{6}{y}$$

First, we have to find the LCD. In this case, the LCD will be xy. We
then multiply each expression by the appropriate form of 1 to obtain xy
as the denominator for each fraction.

$$\begin{array}{l}
{\frac{5}{x} \cdot \frac{y}{y} + \frac{6}{y} \cdot \frac{x}{x}} \\
{\frac{5y}{xy} + \frac{6x}{xy}}
\end{array}$$

Now that the expressions have the same denominator, we simply add the
numerators to find the sum.

$$\frac{6x + 5y}{xy}$$

Multiplying by y y or x x does not change the value of the original
expression because any number divided by itself is 1, and multiplying an
expression by 1 gives the original expression.
:::

::: {#Example_01_06_05 .example}
Subtract the rational expressions:

$$\frac{6}{x^{2} + 4x + 4} - \frac{2}{x^{2}-4}$$

$$\begin{array}{ll}
{\frac{6}{{(x + 2)}^{2}} - \frac{2}{(x + 2)(x - 2)}} & {\qquad\text{Factor}.} \\
{\frac{6}{{(x + 2)}^{2}} \cdot \frac{x - 2}{x - 2} - \frac{2}{(x + 2)(x - 2)} \cdot \frac{x + 2}{x + 2}} & {\qquad\text{Multiply~each~fraction~to~get~LCD~as~denominator}.} \\
{\frac{6(x - 2)}{{(x + 2)}^{2}(x - 2)} - \frac{2(x + 2)}{{(x + 2)}^{2}(x - 2)}} & {\qquad\text{Multiply}.} \\
\frac{6x - 12 - (2x + 4)}{{(x + 2)}^{2}(x - 2)} & {\qquad\text{Apply~distributive~property}.} \\
\frac{4x - 16}{{(x + 2)}^{2}(x - 2)} & {\qquad\text{Subtract}.} \\
\frac{4(x - 4)}{{(x + 2)}^{2}(x - 2)} & {\qquad\text{Simplify}.}
\end{array}$$
:::

:::: {#fs-id1167339243148 .note}
::: title
:::

Q&A

*Do we have to use the LCD to add or subtract rational expressions?*

*No. Any common denominator will work, but it is easiest to use the
LCD.*
::::

:::: {#fs-id1167339243167 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Subtract the rational expressions: 3 x+5 ŌłÆ 1 xŌłÆ3 .

2(xŌłÆ7) (x+5)(xŌłÆ3)
::::

# Simplifying Complex Rational Expressions {#fs-id1167339268842}

A complex rational expression is a rational expression that contains
additional rational expressions in the numerator, the denominator, or
both. We can simplify complex rational expressions by rewriting the
numerator and denominator as single rational expressions and dividing.
The complex rational expression a 1 b +c can be simplified by rewriting
the numerator as the fraction a 1 and combining the expressions in the
denominator as 1+bc b . We can then rewrite the expression as a
multiplication problem using the reciprocal of the denominator. We get a
1 Ōŗģ b 1+bc , which is equal to ab 1+bc .

:::: {#fs-id1167339196667 .note}
::: title
:::

How To

*Given a complex rational expression, simplify it.*

Combine the expressions in the numerator into a single rational
expression by adding or subtracting.

Combine the expressions in the denominator into a single rational
expression by adding or subtracting.

Rewrite as the numerator divided by the denominator.

Rewrite as multiplication.

Multiply.

Simplify.
::::

::: {#Example_01_06_06 .example}
Simplify: y+ 1 x x y .

Begin by combining the expressions in the numerator into one expression.

$$\begin{array}{lc}
{y \cdot \frac{x}{x} + \frac{1}{x}} & {\qquad\text{\quad\quad}\text{Multiply~by~}\frac{x}{x}\mspace{9mu}\text{to~get~LCD~as~denominator}.} \\
{\frac{xy}{x} + \frac{1}{x}} & \\
\frac{xy + 1}{x} & {\qquad\text{\quad\quad}\text{Add~numerators}.}
\end{array}$$

Now the numerator is a single rational expression and the denominator is
a single rational expression.

$$\frac{\frac{xy + 1}{x}}{\frac{x}{y}}$$

We can rewrite this as division, and then multiplication.

$$\begin{array}{lc}
{\frac{xy + 1}{x} \div \frac{x}{y}} & \\
{\frac{xy + 1}{x} \cdot \frac{y}{x}} & {\qquad\text{Rewrite~as~multiplication}\text{.}} \\
\frac{y(xy + 1)}{x^{2}} & {\qquad\text{Multiply}\text{.}}
\end{array}$$
:::

:::: {#fs-id1167339223469 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Simplify: x y ŌłÆ y x y

x 2 ŌłÆ y 2 x y 2
::::

:::: {#fs-id1167339286517 .note}
::: title
:::

Q&A

*Can a complex rational expression always be simplified?*

*Yes. We can always rewrite a complex rational expression as a
simplified rational expression.*
::::

:::: {#fs-id1167339286537 .note}
::: title
:::

Media

Access these online resources for additional instruction and practice
with rational expressions.

Simplify Rational Expressions

Multiply and Divide Rational Expressions

Add and Subtract Rational Expressions

Simplify a Complex Fraction
::::

# Key Concepts {#fs-id1167339230898}

Rational expressions can be simplified by cancelling common factors in
the numerator and denominator. See

.

We can multiply rational expressions by multiplying the numerators and
multiplying the denominators. See

.

To divide rational expressions, multiply by the reciprocal of the second
expression. See

.

Adding or subtracting rational expressions requires finding a common
denominator. See

and

.

Complex rational expressions have fractions in the numerator or the
denominator. These expressions can be simplified. See

.

# Section Exercises {#fs-id1167339230956}

## Verbal {#fs-id1167339230960}

How can you use factoring to simplify rational expressions?

You can factor the numerator and denominator to see if any of the terms
can cancel one another out.

How do you use the LCD to combine two rational expressions?

Tell whether the following statement is true or false and explain why:
You only need to find the LCD when adding or subtracting rational
expressions.

True. Multiplication and division do not require finding the LCD because
the denominators can be combined through those operations, whereas
addition and subtraction require like terms.

## Algebraic {#fs-id1167339230995}

For the following exercises, simplify the rational expressions.

x 2 ŌłÆ16 x 2 ŌłÆ5x+4

y 2 +10y+25 y 2 +11y+30

y+5 y+6

6 a 2 ŌłÆ24a+24 6 a 2 ŌłÆ24

9 b 2 +18b+9 3b+3

3b+3

mŌłÆ12 m 2 ŌłÆ144

2 x 2 +7xŌłÆ4 4 x 2 +2xŌłÆ2

x+4 2x+2

6 x 2 +5xŌłÆ4 3 x 2 +19x+20

a 2 +9a+18 a 2 +3aŌłÆ18

a+3 aŌłÆ3

3 c 2 +25cŌłÆ18 3 c 2 ŌłÆ23c+14

12 n 2 ŌłÆ29nŌłÆ8 28 n 2 ŌłÆ5nŌłÆ3

3nŌłÆ8 7nŌłÆ3

For the following exercises, multiply the rational expressions and
express the product in simplest form.

x 2 ŌłÆxŌłÆ6 2 x 2 +xŌłÆ6 Ōŗģ 2 x 2 +7xŌłÆ15 x 2 ŌłÆ9

c 2 +2cŌłÆ24 c 2 +12c+36 Ōŗģ c 2 ŌłÆ10c+24 c 2 ŌłÆ8c+16

cŌłÆ6 c+6

2 d 2 +9dŌłÆ35 d 2 +10d+21 Ōŗģ 3 d 2 +2dŌłÆ21 3 d 2 +14dŌłÆ49

10 h 2 ŌłÆ9hŌłÆ9 2 h 2 ŌłÆ19h+24 Ōŗģ h 2 ŌłÆ16h+64 5 h 2 ŌłÆ37hŌłÆ24

1

6 b 2 +13b+6 4 b 2 ŌłÆ9 Ōŗģ 6 b 2 +31bŌłÆ30 18 b 2 ŌłÆ3bŌłÆ10

2 d 2 +15d+25 4 d 2 ŌłÆ25 Ōŗģ 2 d 2 ŌłÆ15d+25 25 d 2 ŌłÆ1

d 2 ŌłÆ25 25 d 2 ŌłÆ1

6 x 2 ŌłÆ5xŌłÆ50 15 x 2 ŌłÆ44xŌłÆ20 Ōŗģ 20 x 2 ŌłÆ7xŌłÆ6 2 x 2 +9x+10

t 2 ŌłÆ1 t 2 +4t+3 Ōŗģ t 2 +2tŌłÆ15 t 2 ŌłÆ4t+3

t+5 t+3

2 n 2 ŌłÆnŌłÆ15 6 n 2 +13nŌłÆ5 Ōŗģ 12 n 2 ŌłÆ13n+3 4 n 2 ŌłÆ15n+9

36 x 2 ŌłÆ25 6 x 2 +65x+50 Ōŗģ 3 x 2 +32x+20 18 x 2 +27x+10

6xŌłÆ5 6x+5

For the following exercises, divide the rational expressions.

3 y 2 ŌłÆ7yŌłÆ6 2 y 2 ŌłÆ3yŌłÆ9 ├Ę y 2 +yŌłÆ2 2 y 2 +yŌłÆ3

6 p 2 +pŌłÆ12 8 p 2 +18p+9 ├Ę 6 p 2 ŌłÆ11p+4 2 p 2 +11pŌłÆ6

p+6 4p+3

q 2 ŌłÆ9 q 2 +6q+9 ├Ę q 2 ŌłÆ2qŌłÆ3 q 2 +2qŌłÆ3

18 d 2 +77dŌłÆ18 27 d 2 ŌłÆ15d+2 ├Ę 3 d 2 +29dŌłÆ44 9 d 2 ŌłÆ15d+4

2d+9 d+11

16 x 2 +18xŌłÆ55 32 x 2 ŌłÆ36xŌłÆ11 ├Ę 2 x 2 +17x+30 4 x 2 +25x+6

144 b 2 ŌłÆ25 72 b 2 ŌłÆ6bŌłÆ10 ├Ę 18 b 2 ŌłÆ21b+5 36 b 2 ŌłÆ18bŌłÆ10

12b+5 3bŌłÆ1

16 a 2 ŌłÆ24a+9 4 a 2 +17aŌłÆ15 ├Ę 16 a 2 ŌłÆ9 4 a 2 +11a+6

22 y 2 +59y+10 12 y 2 +28yŌłÆ5 ├Ę 11 y 2 +46y+8 24 y 2 ŌłÆ10y+1

4yŌłÆ1 y+4

9 x 2 +3xŌłÆ20 3 x 2 ŌłÆ7x+4 ├Ę 6 x 2 +4xŌłÆ10 x 2 ŌłÆ2x+1

For the following exercises, add and subtract the rational expressions,
and then simplify.

4 x + 10 y

10x+4y xy

12 2q ŌłÆ 6 3p

4 a+1 + 5 aŌłÆ3

9aŌłÆ7 a 2 ŌłÆ2aŌłÆ3

c+2 3 ŌłÆ cŌłÆ4 4

y+3 yŌłÆ2 + yŌłÆ3 y+1

2 y 2 ŌłÆy+9 y 2 ŌłÆyŌłÆ2

xŌłÆ1 x+1 ŌłÆ 2x+3 2x+1

3z z+1 + 2z+5 zŌłÆ2

5 z 2 +z+5 z 2 ŌłÆzŌłÆ2

4p p+1 ŌłÆ p+1 4p

x x+1 + y y+1

x+2xy+y x+xy+y+1

For the following exercises, simplify the rational expression.

6 y ŌłÆ 4 x y

2 a + 7 b b

2b+7a a b 2

x 4 ŌłÆ p 8 p

3 a + b 6 2b 3a

18+ab 4b

3 x+1 + 2 xŌłÆ1 xŌłÆ1 x+1

a b ŌłÆ b a a+b ab

aŌłÆb

2x 3 + 4x 7 x 2

2c c+2 + cŌłÆ1 c+1 2c+1 c+1

3 c 2 +3cŌłÆ2 2 c 2 +5c+2

x y ŌłÆ y x x y + y x

## Real-World Applications {#fs-id1167339433082}

Brenda is placing tile on her bathroom floor. The area of the floor is
15 x 2 ŌłÆ8xŌłÆ7 ft2. The area of one tile is x 2 ŌłÆ2x+1 ft 2 . To find the
number of tiles needed, simplify the rational expression: 15 x 2 ŌłÆ8xŌłÆ7 x
2 ŌłÆ2x+1 .

15x+7 xŌłÆ1

The area of Lijuan\'s yard is 25 x 2 ŌłÆ625 ft2. A patch of sod has an
area of x 2 ŌłÆ10x+25 ft2. Divide the two areas and simplify to find how
many pieces of sod Lijuan needs to cover her yard.

Elroi wants to mulch his garden. His garden is x 2 +18x+81 ft2. One bag
of mulch covers x 2 ŌłÆ81 ft2. Divide the expressions and simplify to find
how many bags of mulch Elroi needs to mulch his garden.

x+9 xŌłÆ9

## Extensions {#fs-id1167339299394}

For the following exercises, perform the given operations and simplify.

x 2 +xŌłÆ6 x 2 ŌłÆ2xŌłÆ3 Ōŗģ 2 x 2 ŌłÆ3xŌłÆ9 x 2 ŌłÆxŌłÆ2 ├Ę 10 x 2 +27x+18 x 2 +2x+1

3 y 2 ŌłÆ10y+3 3 y 2 +5yŌłÆ2 Ōŗģ 2 y 2 ŌłÆ3yŌłÆ20 2 y 2 ŌłÆyŌłÆ15 yŌłÆ4

1 y+2

4a+1 2aŌłÆ3 + 2aŌłÆ3 2a+3 4 a 2 +9 a

x 2 +7x+12 x 2 +xŌłÆ6 ├Ę 3 x 2 +19x+28 8 x 2 ŌłÆ4xŌłÆ24 ├Ę 2 x 2 +xŌłÆ3 3 x 2
+4xŌłÆ7

4

# Chapter Review Exercises {#fs-id1167339219520}

## [Real Numbers: Algebra Essentials](#) {#fs-id1167339219527}

For the following exercises, perform the given operations.

( 5ŌłÆ3Ōŗģ2 ) 2 ŌłÆ6

ŌłÆ5

64├Ę( 2Ōŗģ8 )+14├Ę7

2Ōŗģ 5 2 +6├Ę2

53

For the following exercises, solve the equation.

5x+9=ŌłÆ11

2y+ 4 2 =64

y=24

For the following exercises, simplify the expression.

9( y+2 )├Ę3Ōŗģ2+1

3m( 4+7 )ŌłÆm

32m

For the following exercises, identify the number as rational,
irrational, whole, or natural. Choose the most descriptive answer.

11

0

whole

5 6

11

irrational

## [Exponents and Scientific Notation](#) {#fs-id1167339432142}

For the following exercises, simplify the expression.

2 2 Ōŗģ 2 4

4 5 4 3

16

( a 2 b 3 ) 4

6 a 2 Ōŗģ a 0 2 a ŌłÆ4

3 a 6

( xy ) 4 y 3 Ōŗģ 2 x 5

4 ŌłÆ2 x 3 y ŌłÆ3 2 x 0

x 3 32 y 3

( 2 x 2 y ) ŌłÆ2

( 16 a 3 b 2 ) ( 4a b ŌłÆ1 ) ŌłÆ2

a

Write the number in standard notation: 2.1314├Ś 10 ŌłÆ6

Write the number in scientific notation: 16,340,000

1.634├Ś 10 7

## [Radicals and Rational Expressions](#) {#fs-id1167339296075}

For the following exercises, find the principal square root.

121

196

14

361

75

5 3

162

32 25

4 2 5

80 81

49 1250

7 2 50

2 4+ 2

4 3 +6 3

10 3

12 5 ŌłÆ13 5

ŌłÆ243 5

ŌłÆ3

250 3 ŌłÆ8 3

## [Polynomials](#) {#fs-id1167339206663}

For the following exercises, perform the given operations and simplify.

(3 x 3 +2xŌłÆ1)+(4 x 2 ŌłÆ2x+7)

3 x 3 +4 x 2 +6

( 2y+1 )ŌłÆ( 2 y 2 ŌłÆ2yŌłÆ5 )

(2 x 2 +3xŌłÆ6)+(3 x 2 ŌłÆ4x+9)

5 x 2 ŌłÆx+3

( 6 a 2 +3a+10 )ŌłÆ( 6 a 2 ŌłÆ3a+5 )

(k+3)(kŌłÆ6)

k 2 ŌłÆ3kŌłÆ18

(2h+1)(3hŌłÆ2)

( x+1 )( x 2 +1 )

x 3 + x 2 +x+1

(mŌłÆ2)( m 2 +2mŌłÆ3)

( a+2b )( 3aŌłÆb )

3 a 2 +5abŌłÆ2 b 2

( x+y )( xŌłÆy )

## [Factoring Polynomials](#) {#fs-id1167339298272}

For the following exercises, find the greatest common factor.

81p+9pqŌłÆ27 p 2 q 2

9p

12 x 2 y+4x y 2 ŌłÆ18xy

88 a 3 b+4 a 2 bŌłÆ144 a 2

4 a 2

For the following exercises, factor the polynomial.

2 x 2 ŌłÆ9xŌłÆ18

8 a 2 +30aŌłÆ27

(4aŌłÆ3)(2a+9)

d 2 ŌłÆ5dŌłÆ66

x 2 +10x+25

( x+5 ) 2

y 2 ŌłÆ6y+9

4 h 2 ŌłÆ12hk+9 k 2

(2hŌłÆ3k) 2

361 x 2 ŌłÆ121

p 3 +216

(p+6)( p 2 ŌłÆ6p+36)

8 x 3 ŌłÆ125

64 q 3 ŌłÆ27 p 3

(4qŌłÆ3p)(16 q 2 +12pq+9 p 2 )

4x (xŌłÆ1) ŌłÆ 1 4 +3 (xŌłÆ1) 3 4

3p ( p+3 ) 1 3 ŌłÆ8 ( p+3 ) 4 3

( p+3 ) 1 3 ( ŌłÆ5pŌłÆ24 )

4r ( 2rŌłÆ1 ) ŌłÆ 2 3 ŌłÆ5 ( 2rŌłÆ1 ) 1 3

## [Rational Expressions](#) {#fs-id1167339433907}

For the following exercises, simplify the expression.

x 2 ŌłÆxŌłÆ12 x 2 ŌłÆ8x+16

x+3 xŌłÆ4

4 y 2 ŌłÆ25 4 y 2 ŌłÆ20y+25

2 a 2 ŌłÆaŌłÆ3 2 a 2 ŌłÆ6aŌłÆ8 Ōŗģ 5 a 2 ŌłÆ19aŌłÆ4 10 a 2 ŌłÆ13aŌłÆ3

1 2

dŌłÆ4 d 2 ŌłÆ9 Ōŗģ dŌłÆ3 d 2 ŌłÆ16

m 2 +5m+6 2 m 2 ŌłÆ5mŌłÆ3 ├Ę 2 m 2 +3mŌłÆ9 4 m 2 ŌłÆ4mŌłÆ3

m+2 mŌłÆ3

4 d 2 ŌłÆ7dŌłÆ2 6 d 2 ŌłÆ17d+10 ├Ę 8 d 2 +6d+1 6 d 2 +7dŌłÆ10

10 x + 6 y

6x+10y xy

12 a 2 +2a+1 ŌłÆ 3 a 2 ŌłÆ1

1 d + 2 c 6c+12d dc

1 6

3 x ŌłÆ 7 y 2 x

# Chapter Practice Test {#fs-id1167339434864}

For the following exercises, identify the number as rational,
irrational, whole, or natural. Choose the most descriptive answer.

ŌłÆ13

rational

2

For the following exercises, evaluate the expression.

2(x+3)ŌłÆ12;x=2

x=--2

y (3+3) 2 ŌłÆ26;y=1

Write the number in standard notation: 3.1415├Ś 10 6

3,141,500

Write the number in scientific notation: 0.0000000212.

For the following exercises, simplify the expression.

ŌłÆ2Ōŗģ ( 2+3Ōŗģ2 ) 2 +144

16

4( x+3 )ŌłÆ( 6x+2 )

3 5 Ōŗģ 3 ŌłÆ3

9

( 2 3 ) 3

8 x 3 ( 2x ) 2

2x

( 16 y 0 )2 y ŌłÆ2

441

21

490

9x 16

3 x 4

121 b 2 1+ b

6 24 +7 54 ŌłÆ12 6

21 6

ŌłÆ8 3 625 4

(13 q 3 +2 q 2 ŌłÆ3)ŌłÆ(6 q 2 +5qŌłÆ3)

13 q 3 ŌłÆ4 q 2 ŌłÆ5q

( 6 p 2 +2p+1 )+( 9 p 2 ŌłÆ1 )

(nŌłÆ2)( n 2 ŌłÆ4n+4)

n 3 ŌłÆ6 n 2 +12nŌłÆ8

(aŌłÆ2b)(2a+b)

For the following exercises, factor the polynomial.

16 x 2 ŌłÆ81

(4x+9)(4xŌłÆ9)

y 2 +12y+36

27 c 3 ŌłÆ1331

(3cŌłÆ11)(9 c 2 +33c+121)

3x (xŌłÆ6) ŌłÆ 1 4 +2 (xŌłÆ6) 3 4

For the following exercises, simplify the expression.

2 z 2 +7z+3 z 2 ŌłÆ9 Ōŗģ 4 z 2 ŌłÆ15z+9 4 z 2 ŌłÆ1

4zŌłÆ3 2zŌłÆ1

x y + 2 x

a 2b ŌłÆ 2b 9a 3aŌłÆ2b 6a

3a+2b 3b

# 

least common denominator

the smallest multiple that two denominators have in common

rational expression

the quotient of two polynomial expressions
