m51274

> In this section, you will:
>
> Recognize characteristics of parabolas.
>
> Understand how the graph of a parabola is related to its quadratic
> function.
>
> Determine a quadratic function's minimum or maximum value.
>
> Solve problems involving a quadratic function's minimum or maximum
> value.

f929bd85-ed50-4a67-a528-40008aa14d0c

#  {#eip-516}

## Learning Objectives {#eip-954}

Graph quadratic functions using properties. (IA 9.6.4)

## Objective 1: Graph quadratic functions using properties. (IA 9.6.4) {#eip-37}

A quadratic function is a function that can be written in the general
form f(x)=ax2+bx+c, where *a, b*, and *c* are real numbers and a≠0. The
graph of quadratic function is called a parabola. Parabolas are
symmetric around a line (also called an axis) and have the highest
(maximum) or the lowest (minimum) point that is called a vertex.

### Making a Table {#eip-791}

We can graph quadratic function f(x)=x2 by making a table and plotting
points.

<figure id="f-1">

</figure>

### Practice Makes Perfect {#eip-699}

Graph quadratic function by making a table and plotting points.

Graph f(x)=x2-1

ⓐ Choose integer values for x, substitute them into the equation and
simplify to find f(x) . Record the values of the ordered pairs in the
chart.

ⓑ Plot the points, and then connect them with a smooth curve. The result
will be the graph of the function.

  *x*   *f(x)*
  ----- --------
        
        
        
        

ⓒ In what direction does it open?

<figure id="eip-idm604757248">

</figure>

ⓓ Find the vertex.

ⓔ Find the axis of symmetry.

Graph f(x)=-x2+2

ⓐ Choose integer values for x, substitute them into the equation and
simplify to find f(x) . Record the values of the ordered pairs in the
chart.

  *x*   *f(x)*
  ----- --------
        
        
        
        

ⓑ Plot the points, and then connect them with a smooth curve. The result
will be the graph of the function.

<figure id="eip-idm603457760">

</figure>

ⓒ In what direction does it open?

ⓓ Find the vertex.

ⓔ Find the axis of symmetry.

Fill in the blanks based on your observations in parts ⓐ and ⓑ.

ⓐ

Parabola opens \_\_\_\_\_\_\_ if

a

\< 0.

ⓑ

Parabola opens \_\_\_\_\_\_\_ if

a

\> 0.

Graphing of quadratic functions is much easier when we know the vertex
and the axis of symmetry. The *vertex* of the graph of the quadratic
function in the form f(x)=ax2+bx+c is (-b2a, f(-b2a)) .

The line or axis of symmetry of the parabola is the vertical line x=-b2a
.

::: {#eip-974 .example}
f(x)=2x2-4x-3

Notice that a= 2       b=-4       c= -3  

First, find the x-coordinate of the vertex by evaluating
-b2a: -b2a=\--42(2)=1

Now we can find the y-coordinate by evaluating
f(-b2a)=f(1)=2(1)2-4(1)-3=-5

The vertex is at the point (1, -5) and the axis of symmetry is x=1
:::

:::: {#eip-idm1087199424 .note}
::: title
:::

*Using a vertex to graph a quadratic function in the form* f(x)=ax2+bx+c

Determine if parabola opens up or down

Find the vertex and axis of symmetry

Pick two x-values right next to the vertex and find corresponding
y-values

Plot the vertex and the two points you found

Plot two symmetrical points using the axis of symmetry

Draw a smooth curve through the points
::::

### Practice Makes Perfect {#eip-754}

Graphing quadratic functions using a vertex.

Graph f(x)=-2x2+8x+6

ⓐ Determine the direction of opening.

<figure id="eip-idm609078496">

</figure>

ⓑ Find and plot the vertex.

ⓒ Find the axis of symmetry.

ⓓ Find and plot 2 more points and symmetrical points.

  ----- --------
  *x*   *f(x)*
        
        
        
        
  ----- --------

ⓔ Does it have a maximum or a minimum? Find this point.

ⓕ Find domain and range.

Graph f(x)=(x+1)2-3

ⓐ Complete the following table and plot the points.

  ----- --------
  *x*   *f(x)*
        
        
        
        
  ----- --------

<figure id="eip-idm218076208">

</figure>

ⓑ Find the vertex of the graph. (\_\_\_, \_\_\_)

ⓒ Is there a connection between the equation of the function and
coordinates of the vertex? Explain.

ⓓ We call this form of quadratic function a *vertex, or standard form*.
Why do you think it is called vertex form?

<figure id="Figure_03_02_001">

</figure>

Curved antennas, such as the ones shown in [\#](#), are commonly used to
focus microwaves and radio waves to transmit television and telephone
signals, as well as satellite and spacecraft communication. The
cross-section of the antenna is in the shape of a parabola, which can be
described by a quadratic function.

In this section, we will investigate quadratic functions, which
frequently model problems involving area and projectile motion. Working
with quadratic functions can be less complex than working with higher
degree functions, so they provide a good opportunity for a detailed
study of function behavior.

# Recognizing Characteristics of Parabolas {#fs-id1165137762207}

The graph of a quadratic function is a U-shaped curve called a parabola.
One important feature of the graph is that it has an extreme point,
called the vertex. If the parabola opens up, the vertex represents the
lowest point on the graph, or the minimum value of the quadratic
function. If the parabola opens down, the vertex represents the highest
point on the graph, or the maximum value. In either case, the vertex is
a turning point on the graph. The graph is also symmetric with a
vertical line drawn through the vertex, called the axis of symmetry.
These features are illustrated in [\#](#).

<figure id="Figure_03_02_002">

</figure>

The *y*-intercept is the point at which the parabola crosses the
*y*-axis. The *x*-intercepts are the points at which the parabola
crosses the *x*-axis. If they exist, the *x*-intercepts represent the
zeros*,* or roots, of the quadratic function, the values of x at which
y=0.

::: {#Example_03_02_01 .example}
Determine the vertex, axis of symmetry, zeros, and y- intercept of the
parabola shown in [\#](#).

<figure id="Figure_03_02_003">

</figure>

The vertex is the turning point of the graph. We can see that the vertex
is at ( 3,1 ). Because this parabola opens upward, the axis of symmetry
is the vertical line that intersects the parabola at the vertex. So the
axis of symmetry is x=3. This parabola does not cross the x- axis, so it
has no zeros. It crosses the y- axis at ( 0,7 ) so this is the
*y*-intercept.
:::

# Understanding How the Graphs of Parabolas are Related to Their Quadratic Functions {#fs-id1165137641326}

The general form *of a quadratic function* presents the function in the
form

$$f(x) = ax^{2} + bx + c$$

where a,b, and c are real numbers and a≠0. If a\>0, the parabola opens
upward. If a\<0, the parabola opens downward. We can use the general
form of a parabola to find the equation for the axis of symmetry.

The axis of symmetry is defined by x=− b 2a . If we use the quadratic
formula, x= −b± b 2 −4ac 2a , to solve a x 2 +bx+c=0 for the x-
intercepts, or zeros, we find the value of x halfway between them is
always x=− b 2a , the equation for the axis of symmetry.

[\#](#) represents the graph of the quadratic function written in
general form as y= x 2 +4x+3. In this form, a=1,b=4, and c=3. Because
a\>0, the parabola opens upward. The axis of symmetry is x=− 4 2( 1 )
=−2. This also makes sense because we can see from the graph that the
vertical line x=−2 divides the graph in half. The vertex always occurs
along the axis of symmetry. For a parabola that opens upward, the vertex
occurs at the lowest point on the graph, in this instance, (−2,−1). The
x- intercepts, those points where the parabola crosses the x- axis,
occur at (−3,0) and (−1,0).

<figure id="Figure_03_02_004">

</figure>

The *standard form of a quadratic function* presents the function in the
form

$$f(x) = a{(x - h)}^{2} + k$$

where ( h,k ) is the vertex. Because the vertex appears in the standard
form of the quadratic function, this form is also known as the vertex
form of a quadratic function.

As with the general form, if a\>0, the parabola opens upward and the
vertex is a minimum. If a\<0, the parabola opens downward, and the
vertex is a maximum. [\#](#) represents the graph of the quadratic
function written in standard form as y=−3 ( x+2 ) 2 +4. Since x--h=x+2
in this example, h=--2. In this form, a=−3,h=−2, and k=4. Because a\<0,
the parabola opens downward. The vertex is at ( −2,4 ).

<figure id="Figure_03_02_005">

</figure>

The standard form is useful for determining how the graph is transformed
from the graph of y= x 2 . [\#](#) is the graph of this basic function.

<figure id="Figure_03_02_006">

</figure>

If k\>0, the graph shifts upward, whereas if k\<0, the graph shifts
downward. In [\#](#), k\>0, so the graph is shifted 4 units upward. If
h\>0, the graph shifts toward the right and if h\<0, the graph shifts to
the left. In [\#](#), h\<0, so the graph is shifted 2 units to the left.
The magnitude of a indicates the stretch of the graph. If \| a \|\>1,
the point associated with a particular x- value shifts farther from the
*x-*axis, so the graph appears to become narrower, and there is a
vertical stretch. But if \| a \|\<1, the point associated with a
particular x- value shifts closer to the *x-*axis, so the graph appears
to become wider, but in fact there is a vertical compression. In
[\#](#), \| a \|\>1, so the graph becomes narrower.

The standard form and the general form are equivalent methods of
describing the same function. We can see this by expanding out the
general form and setting it equal to the standard form.

$$\begin{array}{rcl}
{a{(x - h)}^{2} + k} & = & {ax^{2} + bx + c} \\
{ax^{2} - 2ahx + (ah^{2} + k)} & = & {ax^{2} + bx + c}
\end{array}$$

For the linear terms to be equal, the coefficients must be equal.

$$–2ah = b,\mspace{9mu}\text{so~}h = - \frac{b}{2a}$$

This is the axis of symmetry we defined earlier. Setting the constant
terms equal:

$$\begin{array}{ccl}
{ah^{2} + k} & = & c \\
k & = & {c - ah^{2}} \\
 & = & {c - a - \left( \frac{b}{2a} \right)^{2}} \\
 & = & {c - \frac{b^{2}}{4a}}
\end{array}$$

In practice, though, it is usually easier to remember that *k* is the
output value of the function when the input is h, so f(h)=k.

:::: {#fs-id1165137749882 .note}
::: title
Forms of Quadratic Functions
:::

A quadratic function is a polynomial function of degree two. The graph
of a quadratic function is a parabola.

The general form of a quadratic function is f(x)=a x 2 +bx+c where a,b,
and c are real numbers and a≠0.

The standard form of a quadratic function is f(x)=a (x−h) 2 +k where
a≠0.

The vertex (h,k) is located at

$$h = –\frac{b}{2a},\mspace{9mu} k = f(h) = f\left( \frac{- b}{2a} \right)$$
::::

:::: {#fs-id1165131886746 .note}
::: title
:::

How to

*Given a graph of a quadratic function, write the equation of the
function in general form.*

Identify the horizontal shift of the parabola; this value is

h

.

Identify the vertical shift of the parabola; this value is

k

.

Substitute the values of the horizontal and vertical shift for

h

and

k

.

in the function

f

(

x

)

=

a

(

x

--

h

)

2

\+

k

.

Substitute the values of any point, other than the vertex, on the graph
of the parabola for

x

and

f

(

x

)

.

Solve for the stretch factor,

\|

a

\|

.

Expand and simplify to write in general form.
::::

::: {#Example_03_02_02 .example}
Write an equation for the quadratic function g in [\#](#) as a
transformation of f(x)= x 2 , and then expand the formula, and simplify
terms to write the equation in general form.

<figure id="Figure_03_02_007">

</figure>

We can see the graph of *g* is the graph of f(x)= x 2 shifted to the
left 2 and down 3, giving a formula in the form g(x)=a (x−(−2)) 2 −3=a
(x+2) 2 --3.

Substituting the coordinates of a point on the curve, such as (0,−1), we
can solve for the stretch factor.

$$\begin{array}{rcl}
{- 1} & = & {a\left( {0 + 2} \right)^{2} - 3} \\
2 & = & {4a} \\
a & = & \frac{1}{2}
\end{array}$$

In standard form, the algebraic model for this graph is (g)x= 1 2 (x+2)
2 --3.

To write this in general polynomial form, we can expand the formula and
simplify terms.

$$\begin{array}{ccl}
{g(x)} & = & {\frac{1}{2}{(x + 2)}^{2} - 3} \\
 & = & {\frac{1}{2}(x + 2)(x + 2) - 3} \\
 & = & {\frac{1}{2}(x^{2} + 4x + 4) - 3} \\
 & = & {\frac{1}{2}x^{2} + 2x + 2 - 3} \\
 & = & {\frac{1}{2}x^{2} + 2x - 1}
\end{array}$$

Notice that the horizontal and vertical shifts of the basic graph of the
quadratic function determine the location of the vertex of the parabola;
the vertex is unaffected by stretches and compressions.

We can check our work using the table feature on a graphing utility.
First enter Y1= 1 2 (x+2) 2 −3. Next, select TBLSET, then use
TblStart=--6 and ΔTbl = 2, and select TABLE. See [\#](#).

  ------- ----- ----- ----- ----- ---
  *x*     --6   --4   --2   0     2
  *y*     5     --1   --3   --1   5
  ------- ----- ----- ----- ----- ---

The ordered pairs in the table correspond to points on the graph.
:::

:::: {#fs-id1165137527658 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

A coordinate grid has been superimposed over the quadratic path of a
basketball in [\#](#). Assume that the point (--4, 7) is the highest
point of the basketball's trajectory. Find an equation for the path of
the ball. Does the shooter make the basket?

<figure id="Figure_03_02_008">

</figure>

The path passes through the origin and has vertex at ( −4,7 ), so
h(x)=-- 7 16 (x+4) 2 +7. To make the shot, h( −7.5 ) would need to be
about 4 but h(--7.5)≈1.64; he doesn't make it.
::::

:::: {#fs-id1165135168275 .note}
::: title
:::

How To

*Given a quadratic function in general form, find the vertex of the
parabola.*

Identify

a

,

b

,

and

c

.

Find

h

,

the

x

-coordinate of the vertex, by substituting

a

and

b

into

h

=

--

b

2

a

.

Find

k

,

the

y

-coordinate of the vertex, by evaluating

k

=

f

(

h

)

=

f

(

−

b

2

a

)

.
::::

::: {#Example_03_02_03 .example}
Find the vertex of the quadratic function f(x)=2 x 2 --6x+7. Rewrite the
quadratic in standard form (vertex form).

The horizontal coordinate of the vertex will be at h = − b 2a = − −6
2(2) = 6 4 = 3 2 The vertical coordinate of the vertex will be at k =
f(h) = f( 32) = 2(32)2−6(32)+7 = 5 2

Rewriting into standard form, the stretch factor will be the same as the
a in the original quadratic. First, find the horizontal coordinate of
the vertex. Then find the vertical coordinate of the vertex. Substitute
the values into standard form, using the \" a \" from the general form.

$$\begin{array}{rcl}
{f(x)} & = & {ax^{2} + bx + c} \\
{f(x)} & = & {2x^{2} - 6x + 7}
\end{array}$$

The standard form of a quadratic function prior to writing the function
then becomes the following:

$$f(x) = 2\left( {x–\frac{3}{2}} \right)^{2} + \frac{5}{2}$$

One reason we may want to identify the vertex of the parabola is that
this point will inform us where the maximum or minimum value of the
output occurs, k, and where it occurs, x.
:::

:::: {#fs-id1165135362470 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Given the equation g(x)=13+ x 2 −6x, write the equation in general form
and then in standard form.

g(x)= x 2 −6x+13 in general form; g(x)= (x−3) 2 +4 in standard form
::::

# Finding the Domain and Range of a Quadratic Function {#fs-id1165133436210}

Any number can be the input value of a quadratic function. Therefore,
the domain of any quadratic function is all real numbers. Because
parabolas have a maximum or a minimum point, the range is restricted.
Since the vertex of a parabola will be either a maximum or a minimum,
the range will consist of all *y*-values greater than or equal to the
*y*-coordinate at the turning point or less than or equal to the
*y*-coordinate at the turning point, depending on whether the parabola
opens up or down.

:::: {#fs-id1165135161405 .note}
::: title
Domain and Range of a Quadratic Function
:::

The domain of any quadratic function is all real numbers unless the
context of the function presents some restrictions.

The range of a quadratic function written in general form f(x)=a x 2
+bx+c with a positive a value is f(x)≥f( − b 2a ), or \[ f( − b 2a ),∞
); the range of a quadratic function written in general form with a
negative a value is f(x)≤f( − b 2a ), or ( −∞,f( − b 2a ) \].

The range of a quadratic function written in standard form f(x)=a (x−h)
2 +k with a positive a value is f(x)≥k; the range of a quadratic
function written in standard form with a negative a value is f(x)≤k.
::::

:::: {#fs-id1165135205144 .note}
::: title
:::

How To

*Given a quadratic function, find the domain and range.*

Identify the domain of any quadratic function as all real numbers.

Determine whether

a

is positive or negative. If

a

is positive, the parabola has a minimum. If

a

is negative, the parabola has a maximum.

Determine the maximum or minimum value of the parabola,

k

.

If the parabola has a minimum, the range is given by

f

(

x

)

≥

k

,

or

\[

k

,

∞

)

.

If the parabola has a maximum, the range is given by

f

(

x

)

≤

k

,

or

(

−

∞

,

k

\]

.
::::

::: {#Example_03_02_04 .example}
Find the domain and range of f(x)=−5 x 2 +9x−1.

As with any quadratic function, the domain is all real numbers.

Because a is negative, the parabola opens downward and has a maximum
value. We need to determine the maximum value. We can begin by finding
the x- value of the vertex.

$$\begin{array}{rcl}
h & = & {- \frac{b}{2a}} \\
 & = & {- \frac{9}{2(-5)}} \\
 & = & \frac{9}{10}
\end{array}$$

The maximum value is given by f(h).

$$\begin{array}{ccl}
{f\left( \frac{9}{10} \right)} & = & {-5\left( \frac{9}{10} \right)^{2} + 9\left( \frac{9}{10} \right) - 1} \\
 & = & \frac{61}{20}
\end{array}$$

The range is f(x)≤ 61 20 , or ( −∞, 61 20 \].
:::

:::: {#fs-id1165133227752 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Find the domain and range of f(x)=2 ( x− 4 7 ) 2 + 8 11 .

The domain is all real numbers. The range is f(x)≥ 8 11 , or \[ 8 11 ,∞
).
::::

# Determining the Maximum and Minimum Values of Quadratic Functions {#fs-id1165137736541}

The output of the quadratic function at the vertex is the maximum or
minimum value of the function, depending on the orientation of the
parabola. We can see the maximum and minimum values in [\#](#).

<figure id="Figure_03_02_009">

</figure>

There are many real-world scenarios that involve finding the maximum or
minimum value of a quadratic function, such as applications involving
area and revenue.

::: {#Example_03_02_05 .example}
A backyard farmer wants to enclose a rectangular space for a new garden
within her fenced backyard. She has purchased 80 feet of wire fencing to
enclose three sides, and she will use a section of the backyard fence as
the fourth side.

ⓐ

Find a formula for the area enclosed by the fence if the sides of
fencing perpendicular to the existing fence have length

L

.

ⓑ

What dimensions should she make her garden to maximize the enclosed
area?

Let's use a diagram such as [\#](#) to record the given information. It
is also helpful to introduce a temporary variable, W, to represent the
width of the garden and the length of the fence section parallel to the
backyard fence.

<figure id="Figure_03_02_010">

</figure>

ⓐ

We know we have only 80 feet of fence available, and

L

\+

W

\+

L

=

80

,

or more simply,

2

L

\+

W

=

80\.

This allows us to represent the width,

W

,

in terms of

L

.

$$W = 80 - 2L$$

Now we are ready to write an equation for the area the fence encloses.
We know the area of a rectangle is length multiplied by width, so

$$\begin{array}{rcl}
A & = & {LW = L(80 - 2L)} \\
{A(L)} & = & {80L - 2L^{2}}
\end{array}$$

This formula represents the area of the fence in terms of the variable
length L. The function, written in general form, is

$$A(L) = -2L^{2} + 80L.$$

ⓑ

The quadratic has a negative leading coefficient, so the graph will open
downward, and the vertex will be the maximum value for the area. In
finding the vertex, we must be careful because the equation is not
written in standard polynomial form with decreasing powers. This is why
we rewrote the function in general form above. Since

a

is the coefficient of the squared term,

a

=

−2

,

b

=

80

,

and

c

=

0\.

To find the vertex:

$$\begin{array}{cclcccl}
h & = & {- \frac{b}{2a}} & & {\quad k} & = & \left. A(20 \right) \\
 & = & {- \frac{80}{2(-2)}} & {\quad\text{and}} & & = & {80(20) - 2{(20)}^{2}} \\
 & = & 20 & & & = & 800
\end{array}$$

The maximum value of the function is an area of 800 square feet, which
occurs when L=20 feet. When the shorter sides are 20 feet, there is 40
feet of fencing left for the longer side. To maximize the area, she
should enclose the garden so the two shorter sides have length 20 feet
and the longer side parallel to the existing fence has length 40 feet.

This problem also could be solved by graphing the quadratic function. We
can see where the maximum area occurs on a graph of the quadratic
function in [\#](#).

<figure id="Figure_03_02_011">

</figure>
:::

:::: {#fs-id1165133340409 .note}
::: title
:::

How To

*Given an application involving revenue, use a quadratic equation to
find the maximum.*

Write a quadratic equation for a revenue function.

Find the vertex of the quadratic equation.

Determine the

y

-value of the vertex.
::::

::: {#Example_03_02_06 .example}
The unit price of an item affects its supply and demand. That is, if the
unit price goes up, the demand for the item will usually decrease. For
example, a local newspaper currently has 84,000 subscribers at a
quarterly charge of \$30. Market research has suggested that if the
owners raise the price to \$32, they would lose 5,000 subscribers.
Assuming that subscriptions are linearly related to the price, what
price should the newspaper charge for a quarterly subscription to
maximize their revenue?

Revenue is the amount of money a company brings in. In this case, the
revenue can be found by multiplying the price per subscription times the
number of subscribers, or quantity. We can introduce variables, p for
price per subscription and Q for quantity, giving us the equation
Revenue=pQ.

Because the number of subscribers changes with the price, we need to
find a relationship between the variables. We know that currently p=30
and Q=84,000. We also know that if the price rises to \$32, the
newspaper would lose 5,000 subscribers, giving a second pair of values,
p=32 and Q=79,000. From this we can find a linear equation relating the
two quantities. The slope will be

$$\begin{array}{ccl}
m & = & \frac{79,000 - 84,000}{32 - 30} \\
 & = & \frac{-5,000}{2} \\
 & = & -2,500
\end{array}$$

This tells us the paper will lose 2,500 subscribers for each dollar they
raise the price. We can then solve for the *y*-intercept.

$$\begin{array}{rclc}
Q & = & {-2500p + b} & {\qquad\text{Substitute in the point} Q = 84,000\mspace{9mu}\text{and~}p = 30} \\
84,000 & = & {-2500(30) + b} & {\qquad\text{Solve for} b} \\
b & = & 159,000 & 
\end{array}$$

This gives us the linear equation Q=−2,500p+159,000 relating cost and
subscribers. We now return to our revenue equation.

$$\begin{array}{rcl}
{Revenue} & = & {pQ} \\
{Revenue} & = & {p(-2,500p + 159,000)} \\
{Revenue} & = & {-2,500p^{2} + 159,000p}
\end{array}$$

We now have a quadratic function for revenue as a function of the
subscription charge. To find the price that will maximize revenue for
the newspaper, we can find the vertex.

$$\begin{array}{ccl}
h & = & {- \frac{159,000}{2(-2,500)}} \\
 & = & 31.8
\end{array}$$

The model tells us that the maximum revenue will occur if the newspaper
charges \$31.80 for a subscription. To find what the maximum revenue is,
we evaluate the revenue function.

$$\begin{array}{ccl}
\text{maximum revenue} & = & {-2,500{(31.8)}^{2} + 159,000(31.8)} \\
 & = & 2,528,100
\end{array}$$

This could also be solved by graphing the quadratic as in [\#](#). We
can see the maximum revenue on a graph of the quadratic function.

<figure id="Figure_03_02_012">

</figure>
:::

## Finding the *x*- and *y*-Intercepts of a Quadratic Function {#fs-id1165135693703}

Much as we did in the application problems above, we also need to find
intercepts of quadratic equations for graphing parabolas. Recall that we
find the y- intercept of a quadratic by evaluating the function at an
input of zero, and we find the x- intercepts at locations where the
output is zero. Notice in [\#](#) that the number of x- intercepts can
vary depending upon the location of the graph.

<figure id="Figure_03_02_013">

</figure>

:::: {#fs-id1165137464602 .note}
::: title
:::

How To

*Given a quadratic function f( x ), find the y- and *x*-intercepts.*

Evaluate

f

(

0

)

to find the

y

-intercept.

Solve the quadratic equation

f

(

x

)

=

0

to find the

x

-intercepts.
::::

::: {#Example_03_02_07 .example}
Find the *y*- and *x*-intercepts of the quadratic f(x)=3 x 2 +5x−2.

We find the *y*-intercept by evaluating f( 0 ).

$$\begin{array}{ccl}
{f(0)} & = & {3{(0)}^{2} + 5(0) - 2} \\
 & = & -2
\end{array}$$

So the *y*-intercept is at ( 0,−2 ).

For the *x*-intercepts, we find all solutions of f( x )=0.

$$0 = 3x^{2} + 5x - 2$$

In this case, the quadratic can be factored easily, providing the
simplest method for solution.

$$0 = (3x - 1)(x + 2)$$

So the *x*-intercepts are at ( 1 3 ,0 ) and ( −2,0 ).

By graphing the function, we can confirm that the graph crosses the
*y*-axis at (0,−2). We can also confirm that the graph crosses the
*x*-axis at ( 1 3 ,0 ) and (−2,0). See [\#](#)

<figure id="Figure_03_02_014">

</figure>
:::

## Rewriting Quadratics in Standard Form {#fs-id1165135381309}

In [\#](#), the quadratic was easily solved by factoring. However, there
are many quadratics that cannot be factored. We can solve these
quadratics by first rewriting them in standard form.

:::: {#fs-id1165133085664 .note}
::: title
:::

How To

*Given a quadratic function, find the x- intercepts by rewriting in
standard form*.

Substitute

a

and

b

into

h

=

−

b

2

a

.

Substitute

x

=

h

into the general form of the quadratic function to find

k

.

Rewrite the quadratic in standard form using

h

and

k

.

Solve for when the output of the function will be zero to find the

x

\-

intercepts.
::::

::: {#Example_03_02_08 .example}
Find the x- intercepts of the quadratic function f(x)=2 x 2 +4x−4.

We begin by solving for when the output will be zero.

$$0 = 2x^{2} + 4x - 4$$

Because the quadratic is not easily factorable in this case, we solve
for the intercepts by first rewriting the quadratic in standard form.

$$f(x) = a\left( {x - h} \right)^{2} + k$$

We know that a=2. Then we solve for h and k.

$$\begin{array}{cclccl}
h & = & {- \frac{b}{2a}} & {\qquad k} & = & {f(-1)} \\
 & = & {- \frac{4}{2(2)}} & & = & {2{(-1)}^{2} + 4(-1) - 4} \\
 & = & -1 & & = & {\operatorname{}-6}
\end{array}$$

So now we can rewrite in standard form.

$$f(x) = 2{(x + 1)}^{2} - 6$$

We can now solve for when the output will be zero.

$$\begin{array}{l}
{0 = 2{(x + 1)}^{2} - 6} \\
{6 = 2{(x + 1)}^{2}} \\
{3 = {(x + 1)}^{2}} \\
{x + 1 = \pm \sqrt{3}} \\
{x = - 1 \pm \sqrt{3}}
\end{array}$$

The graph has *x*-intercepts at (−1− 3 ,0) and (−1+ 3 ,0).

We can check our work by graphing the given function on a graphing
utility and observing the x- intercepts. See [\#](#).

<figure id="Figure_03_02_015">

</figure>

We could have achieved the same results using the quadratic formula.
Identify a=2,b=4 and c=−4.

$$\begin{array}{ccl}
x & = & \frac{- b \pm \sqrt{b^{2} - 4ac}}{2a} \\
 & = & \frac{-4 \pm \sqrt{4^{2} - 4(2)(-4)}}{2(2)} \\
 & = & \frac{-4 \pm \sqrt{48}}{4} \\
 & = & \frac{-4 \pm \sqrt{3(16)}}{4} \\
 & = & {-1 \pm \sqrt{3}}
\end{array}$$

So the *x*-intercepts occur at ( −1− 3 ,0 ) and ( −1+ 3 ,0 ).
:::

:::: {#fs-id1165134109655 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

In a [Try It](#), we found the standard and general form for the
function g(x)=13+ x 2 −6x. Now find the *y*- and *x*-intercepts (if
any).

*y*-intercept at (0, 13), No x- intercepts
::::

::: {#Example_03_02_10 .example}
A ball is thrown upward from the top of a 40 foot high building at a
speed of 80 feet per second. The ball's height above ground can be
modeled by the equation H(t)=−16 t 2 +80t+40.

ⓐ

When does the ball reach the maximum height?

ⓑ

What is the maximum height of the ball?

ⓒ

When does the ball hit the ground?

ⓐ

The ball reaches the maximum height at the vertex of the parabola.

$$\begin{array}{ccl}
h & = & {- \frac{80}{2(-16)}} \\
 & = & \frac{80}{32} \\
 & = & \frac{5}{2} \\
 & = & 2.5
\end{array}$$

The ball reaches a maximum height after 2.5 seconds.

ⓑ

To find the maximum height, find the

y

\-

coordinate of the vertex of the parabola.

$$\begin{array}{ccl}
k & = & {H\left( {- \frac{b}{2a}} \right)} \\
 & = & {H(2.5)} \\
 & = & {-16(2.5)^{2} + 80(2.5) + 40} \\
 & = & 140
\end{array}$$

The ball reaches a maximum height of 140 feet.

ⓒ

To find when the ball hits the ground, we need to determine when the
height is zero,

H

(

t

)

=

0\.

We use the quadratic formula.

$$\begin{array}{ccl}
t & = & \frac{-80 \pm \sqrt{80^{2} - 4(-16)(40)}}{2(-16)} \\
 & = & \frac{-80 \pm \sqrt{8960}}{-32}
\end{array}$$

Because the square root does not simplify nicely, we can use a
calculator to approximate the values of the solutions.

$$\begin{array}{l}
 \\
 \\
\begin{array}{lll}
{t = \frac{- 80 - \sqrt{8960}}{- 32} \approx 5.458} & \text{or} & {t = \frac{- 80 + \sqrt{8960}}{- 32} \approx - 0.458}
\end{array}
\end{array}$$

The second answer is outside the reasonable domain of our model, so we
conclude the ball will hit the ground after about 5.458 seconds. See
[\#](#).

<figure id="Figure_03_02_016">

</figure>

Note that the graph does not represent the physical path of the ball
upward and downward. Keep the quantities on each axis in mind while
interpreting the graph.
:::

:::: {#fs-id1165134081290 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

A rock is thrown upward from the top of a 112-foot high cliff
overlooking the ocean at a speed of 96 feet per second. The rock's
height above ocean can be modeled by the equation H(t)=−16 t 2 +96t+112.

ⓐ

When does the rock reach the maximum height?

ⓑ

What is the maximum height of the rock?

ⓒ

When does the rock hit the ocean?

ⓐ3 seconds ⓑ256 feet ⓒ7 seconds
::::

:::: {#fs-id1165137475325 .note}
::: title
:::

Media

Access these online resources for additional instruction and practice
with quadratic equations.

Graphing Quadratic Functions in General Form

Graphing Quadratic Functions in Standard Form

Quadratic Function Review

Characteristics of a Quadratic Function
::::

# Key Equations {#fs-id1165134205927}

  --------------------------------------- -------------------
  general form of a quadratic function    f(x)=a x 2 +bx+c
  standard form of a quadratic function   f(x)=a (x−h) 2 +k
  --------------------------------------- -------------------

# Key Concepts {#fs-id1165135426424}

A polynomial function of degree two is called a quadratic function.

The graph of a quadratic function is a parabola. A parabola is a
U-shaped curve that can open either up or down.

The axis of symmetry is the vertical line passing through the vertex.
The zeros, or

x

\-

intercepts, are the points at which the parabola crosses the

x

\-

axis. The

y

\-

intercept is the point at which the parabola crosses the

y

\-

axis. See

,

, and

.

Quadratic functions are often written in general form. Standard or
vertex form is useful to easily identify the vertex of a parabola.
Either form can be written from a graph. See

.

The vertex can be found from an equation representing a quadratic
function. See

.

The domain of a quadratic function is all real numbers. The range varies
with the function. See

.

A quadratic function's minimum or maximum value is given by the

y

\-

value of the vertex.

The minimum or maximum value of a quadratic function can be used to
determine the range of the function and to solve many kinds of
real-world problems, including problems involving area and revenue. See

and

.

The vertex and the intercepts can be identified and interpreted to solve
real-world problems. See

.

# Section Exercises {#fs-id1165135361324}

## Verbal {#fs-id1165135361327}

Explain the advantage of writing a quadratic function in standard form.

When written in that form, the vertex can be easily identified.

How can the vertex of a parabola be used in solving real-world problems?

Explain why the condition of a≠0 is imposed in the definition of the
quadratic function.

If a=0 then the function becomes a linear function.

What is another name for the standard form of a quadratic function?

What two algebraic methods can be used to find the horizontal intercepts
of a quadratic function?

If possible, we can use factoring. Otherwise, we can use the quadratic
formula.

## Algebraic {#fs-id1165133276257}

For the following exercises, rewrite the quadratic functions in vertex
form and give the vertex.

f( x )= x 2 −12x+32

g( x )= x 2 +2x−3

g(x)= (x+1) 2 −4, Vertex ( −1,−4 )

f(x)= x 2 −x

f(x)= x 2 +5x−2

f(x)= ( x+ 5 2 ) 2 − 33 4 , Vertex ( − 5 2 ,− 33 4 )

h( x )=2 x 2 +8x−10

k( x )=3 x 2 −6x−9

f(x)=3 (x−1) 2 −12, Vertex (1,−12)

f(x)=2 x 2 −6x

f(x)=3 x 2 −5x−1

f(x)=3 ( x− 5 6 ) 2 − 37 12 , Vertex ( 5 6 ,− 37 12 )

For the following exercises, determine whether there is a minimum or
maximum value to each quadratic function. Find the value and the axis of
symmetry.

y( x )=2 x 2 +10x+12

f( x )=2 x 2 −10x+4

Minimum is − 17 2 and occurs at 5 2 . Axis of symmetry is x= 5 2 .

f(x)=− x 2 +4x+3

f(x)=4 x 2 +x−1

Minimum is − 17 16 and occurs at − 1 8 . Axis of symmetry is x=− 1 8 .

h( t )=−4 t 2 +6t−1

f(x)= 1 2 x 2 +3x+1

Minimum is − 7 2 and occurs at −3. Axis of symmetry is x=−3.

f(x)=− 1 3 x 2 −2x+3

For the following exercises, determine the domain and range of the
quadratic function.

f(x)= (x−3) 2 +2

Domain is ( −∞,∞ ). Range is \[2,∞).

f(x)=−2 (x+3) 2 −6

f(x)= x 2 +6x+4

Domain is ( −∞,∞ ). Range is \[−5,∞).

f(x)=2 x 2 −4x+2

k( x )=3 x 2 −6x−9

Domain is ( −∞,∞ ). Range is \[−12,∞).

For the following exercises, use the vertex (h,k) and a point on the
graph (x,y) to find the general form of the equation of the quadratic
function.

(h,k)=(2,0),(x,y)=(4,4)

(h,k)=(−2,−1),(x,y)=(−4,3)

f(x)= x 2 +4x+3

(h,k)=(0,1),(x,y)=(2,5)

(h,k)=(2,3),(x,y)=(5,12)

f(x)= x 2 -4x+7

(h,k)=(−5,3),(x,y)=(2,9)

(h,k)=(3,2),(x,y)=(10,1)

f(x)= -149 x 2 +649x +8949

(h,k)=(0,1),(x,y)=(1,0)

(h,k)=(1,0),(x,y)=(0,1)

f(x)= x 2 -2x+1

## Graphical {#fs-id1165133095093}

For the following exercises, sketch a graph of the quadratic function
and give the vertex, axis of symmetry, and intercepts.

f(x)= x 2 −2x

f(x)= x 2 −6x−1

Vertex: (3, −10), axis of symmetry: x = 3, intercepts: (3+10,0) and
(3-10,0)

f(x)= x 2 −5x−6

f(x)= x 2 −7x+3

Vertex: ( 7 2 , − 37 4 ) , axis of symmetry: x=72 , *y*-intercept: (0,3)
, *x*-intercepts: ( 7+37 2 , 0 ), ( 7−37 2 , 0 )

f(x)=−2 x 2 +5x−8

f(x)=4 x 2 −12x−3

Vertex: (32,-12) , axis of symmetry: x=32 , intercept: ( 3+23 2 , 0) and
( 3-23 2 , 0)

For the following exercises, write the equation for the graphed
quadratic function.

f(x)= x 2 +2x+3

f(x)=-3 x 2 −6x−1

f(x)=-14 x 2 −x+2

## Numeric {#fs-id1165131959583}

For the following exercises, use the table of values that represent
points on the graph of a quadratic function. By determining the vertex
and axis of symmetry, find the general form of the equation of the
quadratic function.

  ------- ----- ----- --- --- ---
  *x*     --2   --1   0   1   2
  *y*     5     2     1   2   5
  ------- ----- ----- --- --- ---

  ------- ----- ----- --- --- ---
  *x*     --2   --1   0   1   2
  *y*     1     0     1   4   9
  ------- ----- ----- --- --- ---

f(x)= x 2 +2x+1

  ------- ----- ----- --- --- -----
  *x*     --2   --1   0   1   2
  *y*     --2   1     2   1   --2
  ------- ----- ----- --- --- -----

  ------- ----- ----- --- --- ---
  *x*     --2   --1   0   1   2
  *y*     --8   --3   0   1   0
  ------- ----- ----- --- --- ---

f(x)= - x 2 +2x

  ------- ----- ----- --- --- ---
  *x*     --2   --1   0   1   2
  *y*     8     2     0   2   8
  ------- ----- ----- --- --- ---

f(x)=2 x 2

## Technology {#fs-id1165135513626}

For the following exercises, use a calculator to find the answer.

Graph on the same set of axes the functions f(x)= x 2 , f(x)=2 x 2 , and
f(x)= 1 3 x 2 .

What appears to be the effect of changing the coefficient?

Graph on the same set of axes f(x)= x 2 ,f(x)= x 2 +2 and f(x)= x 2
,f(x)= x 2 +5 and f(x)= x 2 −3. What appears to be the effect of adding
a constant?

Graph on the same set of axes f(x)= x 2 ,f(x)= (x−2) 2 ,f (x−3) 2 , and
f(x)= (x+4) 2 .

What appears to be the effect of adding or subtracting those numbers?

The graph is shifted to the right or left (a horizontal shift).

The path of an object projected at a 45 degree angle with initial
velocity of 80 feet per second is given by the function h(x)= −32 (80) 2
x 2 +x where x is the horizontal distance traveled and h( x ) is the
height in feet. Use the TRACE feature of your calculator to determine
the height of the object when it has traveled 100 feet away
horizontally.

A suspension bridge can be modeled by the quadratic function h(x)=.0001
x 2 with −2000≤x≤2000 where \| x \| is the number of feet from the
center and h( x ) is height in feet. Use the TRACE feature of your
calculator to estimate how far from the center does the bridge have a
height of 100 feet.

The suspension bridge has 1,000 feet distance from the center.

## Extensions {#fs-id1165135629622}

For the following exercises, use the vertex of the graph of the
quadratic function and the direction the graph opens to find the domain
and range of the function.

Vertex (1,−2), opens up.

Vertex ( −1,2 ) opens down.

Domain is (−∞,∞). Range is (-∞,2\].

Vertex (−5,11), opens down.

Vertex (−100,100), opens up.

Domain: (-∞,∞) ; range: \[100,∞)

For the following exercises, write the equation of the quadratic
function that contains the given point and has the same shape as the
given function.

Contains (1,1) and has shape of f(x)=2 x 2 . Vertex is on the y- axis.

Contains (−1,4) and has the shape of f(x)=2 x 2 . Vertex is on the y-
axis.

f(x)=2 x 2 +2

Contains (2,3) and has the shape of f(x)=3 x 2 . Vertex is on the y-
axis.

Contains (1,−3) and has the shape of f(x)=− x 2 . Vertex is on the y-
axis.

f(x)=- x 2 −2

Contains (4,3) and has the shape of f(x)=5 x 2 . Vertex is on the y-
axis.

Contains (1,−6) has the shape of f(x)=3 x 2 . Vertex has x-coordinate of
−1.

f(x)=3 x 2 +6x-15

## Real-World Applications {#fs-id1165131857387}

Find the dimensions of the rectangular dog park producing the greatest
enclosed area given 200 feet of fencing.

Find the dimensions of the rectangular dog park split into 2 pens of the
same size producing the greatest possible enclosed area given 300 feet
of fencing.

75 feet by 50 feet

Find the dimensions of the rectangular dog park producing the greatest
enclosed area split into 3 sections of the same size given 500 feet of
fencing.

Among all of the pairs of numbers whose sum is 6, find the pair with the
largest product. What is the product?

3 and 3; product is 9

Among all of the pairs of numbers whose difference is 12, find the pair
with the smallest product. What is the product?

Suppose that the price per unit in dollars of a cell phone production is
modeled by p=\$45−0.0125x, where x is in thousands of phones produced,
and the revenue represented by thousands of dollars is R=x⋅p. Find the
production level that will maximize revenue.

The revenue reaches the maximum value when 1800 thousand phones are
produced.

A rocket is launched in the air. Its height, in meters above sea level,
as a function of time, in seconds, is given by h( t )=−4.9 t 2
+229t+234. Find the maximum height the rocket attains.

A ball is thrown in the air from the top of a building. Its height, in
meters above ground, as a function of time, in seconds, is given by h( t
)=−4.9 t 2 +24t+8. How long does it take to reach maximum height?

2.449 seconds

A soccer stadium holds 62,000 spectators. With a ticket price of \$11,
the average attendance has been 26,000. When the price dropped to \$9,
the average attendance rose to 31,000. Assuming that attendance is
linearly related to ticket price, what ticket price would maximize
revenue?

A farmer finds that if she plants 75 trees per acre, each tree will
yield 20 bushels of fruit. She estimates that for each additional tree
planted per acre, the yield of each tree will decrease by 3 bushels. How
many trees should she plant per acre to maximize her harvest?

41 trees per acre

# 

axis of symmetry

a vertical line drawn through the vertex of a parabola, that opens up or
down, around which the parabola is symmetric; it is defined by

x

=

−

b

2

a

.

general form of a quadratic function

the function that describes a parabola, written in the form

f

(

x

)

=

a

x

2

\+

b

x

\+

c

, where

a

,

b

,

and

c

are real numbers and

a

≠

0\.

roots

in a given function, the values of

x

at which

y

=

0

, also called zeros

standard form of a quadratic function

the function that describes a parabola, written in the form

f

(

x

)

=

a

(

x

−

h

)

2

\+

k

, where

(

h

,

k

)

is the vertex

vertex

the point at which a parabola changes direction, corresponding to the
minimum or maximum value of the quadratic function

vertex form of a quadratic function

another name for the standard form of a quadratic function

zeros

in a given function, the values of

x

at which

y

=

0

, also called roots
