m51275

> In this section, you will:
>
> Identify power functions.
>
> Identify end behavior of power functions.
>
> Identify polynomial functions.
>
> Identify the degree and leading coefficient of polynomial functions.

e017cb02-d494-4d95-8d09-966d0968a606

#  {#eip-741}

## Learning Objectives {#eip-4}

Determine the degree of polynomials (IA 5.1.1).

Simplify expressions using properties of exponents (IA 5.2.1).

## Objective 1: Simplify expressions using the properties of exponents (IA 5.2.1). {#eip-17}

An exponential expression is an expression that has exponents (or
powers).

:::: {#eip-idm635995584 .note}
::: title
Properties of Exponents
:::

  Name of the Property                        Property               Meaning
  ------------------------------------------- ---------------------- -----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Product Property                            xm·xn=xm+n             Keep the base, add the exponents
  Power Property                              (xn)m=xn·m             Keep the base, multiply the exponents
  Quotient Property                           xmxn=xm-n              Keep the base, subtract the exponents (top minus bottom).
  Power Property for products and quotients   (xy)m=xmym(xy)m=xmym   Raise each base to the power.
  Zero Exponent                               x0=1                   Any non-zero number or variable raised to the power 0 is equal to 1.
  Negative exponent                           x-n=1xn1x-n=xn         Move the base from numerator to denominator or vice versa to make an exponent positive.
::::

::: {#eip-382 .example}
Use the property of exponents to simplify each of the following:

(3x2y)4

  ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ -----------
  Use the product to a power to break the exponent into a product of three exponents   34(x2)4y4
  Simplify (x2)4 by applying the power property                                        34x8y4
  Simplify                                                                             81x8y4
  ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ -----------
:::

### Practice Makes Perfect {#fs-idm460888016}

Use properties of exponents to simplify.

(3xy2x2y-3)4

## Objective 2: Determine the degree of polynomials (IA 5.1.1). {#eip-602}

A term can be a number like -2, a variable like x, or a product of
numbers and variables like 7x3 .

A polynomial is an expression with more than one term with no variables
in the denominator and no negative exponents. Any exponent on the
variables must be whole numbers.

For example 2x+1, 4x2-5x+3 are polynomials.

There are three particular types of polynomials:

A monomial is a one term polynomial like 7x3 or 2.

A binomial is a two term polynomial like 7x3+2 .

A trinomial is a three term polynomial like 4x2-5x+3 .

The degree of a polynomial in one variable is the highest exponent that
appears on the variable in the polynomial. For example, the polynomial
5x2+7x-4 has only one variable, x . The highest exponent on x is 2.

:::: {#eip-711 .example}
::: title
Determine the degree of polynomials.
:::

If the expression is a polynomial, identify it as a monomial, binomial,
trinomial, or other polynomial, and then find the degree of each
polynomial. If it is not a polynomial, state this and give a reason why.

f

(

x

)

=

x

2

f

(

x

)

=

5

x

4

f

(

x

)

=

x

2

/

3

f

(

x

)

=

3

x

f

(

x

)

=

\-

5

x

\-

2

+----------------+-------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+
| *Expression*   | *How many   | *Classification*                           |
|                | variables*  |                                            |
|                |             +--------------+--------------+--------------+
|                |             | *Polynomial? | *If it is a  | *Degree of   |
|                |             | If not,      | polynomial,  | polynomial?* |
|                |             | why?*        | how many     |              |
|                |             |              | terms are    |              |
|                |             |              | there?       |              |
|                |             |              | Classify as  |              |
|                |             |              | a monomial,  |              |
|                |             |              | binomial or  |              |
|                |             |              | trinomial.*  |              |
+----------------+-------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+
| 5x2-2x+7       | 1           | yes          | 3, trinomial | 2            |
+----------------+-------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+
| y-2.5          | 1           | yes          | 2, binomial  | 1            |
+----------------+-------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+
| -5x2y          | 2           | yes          | 1, monomial  | 3            |
+----------------+-------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+
| 4x2-2x3        | 1           | No, there is |              |              |
|                |             | a variable   |              |              |
|                |             | in the       |              |              |
|                |             | denominator  |              |              |
+----------------+-------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+
| b3+13b2-12b+12 | 1           | yes          | 4,           | 3            |
|                |             |              | polynomial   |              |
|                |             |              | or           |              |
|                |             |              | quadrinomial |              |
+----------------+-------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+
| x-2-3xy-10y2   | 1           | No, there is |              |              |
|                |             | a negative   |              |              |
|                |             | exponent on  |              |              |
|                |             | x            |              |              |
+----------------+-------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+
::::

### Power Functions {#eip-119}

A power function is a function with a single term that is the product of
a real number, a coefficient, and a variable raised to a fixed real
number.

A power function is a function that can be represented in the form
f(x)=kxp where k  and p  are real numbers, and k  is known as the
coefficient.

::: {#eip-96 .example}
ⓐ

f

(

x

)

=

x

2

ⓑ

f

(

x

)

=

5

x

4

ⓒ

f

(

x

)

=

x

2

/

3

ⓓ

f

(

x

)

=

3

x

ⓔ

f

(

x

)

=

\-

5

x

\-

2

ⓐ

f

(

x

)

=

x

2

is a power function

ⓑ

f

(

x

)

=

5

x

4

is a power function

ⓒ

f

(

x

)

=

x

2

/

3

is a power function

ⓓ

f

(

x

)

=

3

x

is a power function because the variable is raised to a fixed real
number, 1

ⓔ

f

(

x

)

=

\-

5

x

\-

2

is a power function
:::

### Practice Makes Perfect {#eip-418}

Determine whether each polynomial is a monomial, binomial, trinomial, or
other polynomial, then find the degree of each polynomial.

+--------------+-------------+--------------+-------------+--------------+
| *Expression* | *How many   | *Classification*                          |
|              | variables*  |                                           |
|              |             +--------------+-------------+--------------+
|              |             | *Polynomial? | *If it is a | *Degree of   |
|              |             | If not,      | polynomial, | polynomial?* |
|              |             | why?*        | how many    |              |
|              |             |              | terms are   |              |
|              |             |              | there?      |              |
|              |             |              | Classify as |              |
|              |             |              | a monomial, |              |
|              |             |              | binomial or |              |
|              |             |              | trinomial.* |              |
+--------------+-------------+--------------+-------------+--------------+
| 5x4-2        |             |              |             |              |
+--------------+-------------+--------------+-------------+--------------+
| 2x3-6x2+1    |             |              |             |              |
+--------------+-------------+--------------+-------------+--------------+
| -2x2/3-5x    |             |              |             |              |
+--------------+-------------+--------------+-------------+--------------+
| 12x3         |             |              |             |              |
+--------------+-------------+--------------+-------------+--------------+
| -3x6-5x4+4x3 |             |              |             |              |
+--------------+-------------+--------------+-------------+--------------+
| 3x-3+2       |             |              |             |              |
+--------------+-------------+--------------+-------------+--------------+

Determine whether the following functions are power functions. If they
are not, state it and the reason why.

f(x)=x3

f(x)=2x7

f(x)=4x

f(x)=7x-3

f(x)=-5x3/2

### Graph of Power Functions and End Behavior {#eip-28}

  Graphs of even power functions        Graphs of odd power functions
  ------------------------------------- -------------------------------------
  Graphs of f(x)=x2, f(x)=x4, f(x)=x6   Graphs of f(x)=x3, f(x)=x5, f(x)=x7

ⓐ What are the similarities in the graphs of even power functions? ⓑ
What are the similarities in the graphs of the odd power functions? ⓒ
What are the differences between the graphs of the even power functions
and the odd power functions?

<figure id="CNX_Precalc_Figure_03_03_001.jpg">

</figure>

Suppose a certain species of bird thrives on a small island. Its
population over the last few years is shown in [\#](#).

  ------------------- ------ ------ ------ ------- -------
  *Year*              2009   2010   2011   2012    2013
  *Bird Population*   800    897    992    1,083   1,169
  ------------------- ------ ------ ------ ------- -------

The population can be estimated using the function P(t)=−0.3 t 3
+97t+800, where P(t) represents the bird population on the island t
years after 2009. We can use this model to estimate the maximum bird
population and when it will occur. We can also use this model to predict
when the bird population will disappear from the island. In this
section, we will examine functions that we can use to estimate and
predict these types of changes.

# Identifying Power Functions {#fs-id1165137540446}

Before we can understand the bird problem, it will be helpful to
understand a different type of function. A *power function* is a
function with a single term that is the product of a real number, a
*coefficient,* and a variable raised to a fixed real number.

As an example, consider functions for area or volume. The function for
the area of a circle with radius r is

$$A(r) = \pi r^{2}$$

and the function for the volume of a sphere with radius r is

$$V(r) = \frac{4}{3}\pi r^{3}$$

Both of these are examples of power functions because they consist of a
coefficient, π or 4 3 π, multiplied by a variable r raised to a power.

:::: {#fs-id1165135356525 .note}
::: title
Power Function
:::

A power function is a function that can be represented in the form

$$f(x) = kx^{p}$$

where k and p are real numbers, and k is known as the coefficient.
::::

:::: {#fs-id1165137661479 .note}
::: title
:::

Q&A

*Is f(x)= 2 x a power function?*

*No. A power function contains a variable base raised to a fixed power.
This function has a constant base raised to a variable power. This is
called an exponential function, not a power function.*
::::

::: {#Example_03_03_01 .example}
Which of the following functions are power functions?

f(x) = 1 Constant function f(x) = x Identity function f(x) = x2
Quadratic function f(x) = x3 Cubic function f(x) = 1x
Reciprocal function f(x) = 1x2 Reciprocal squared function f(x) = x
Square root function f(x) = x3 Cube root function

All of the listed functions are power functions.

The constant and identity functions are power functions because they can
be written as f(x)= x 0 and f(x)= x 1 respectively.

The quadratic and cubic functions are power functions with whole number
powers f(x)= x 2 and f(x)= x 3 .

The reciprocal and reciprocal squared functions are power functions with
negative whole number powers because they can be written as f(x)= x −1
and f(x)= x −2 .

The square and cube root functions are power functions with fractional
powers because they can be written as f(x)= x 1 2 or f(x)= x 1 3 .
:::

:::: {#fs-id1165137660222 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Which functions are power functions?

f(x) = 2x⋅4 x 3 g(x) = − x 5 +5 x 3 h(x) = 2 x 5 −1 3 x 2 +4

f(x) is a power function because it can be written as f(x)=8 x 4 . The
other functions are not power functions.
::::

# Identifying End Behavior of Power Functions {#fs-id1165134269023}

[\#](#) shows the graphs of f(x)= x 2 ,g(x)= x 4 and h(x)= x 6 , which
are all power functions with even, positive integer powers. Notice that
these graphs have similar shapes, very much like that of the quadratic
function in the toolkit. However, as the power increases, the graphs
flatten somewhat near the origin and become steeper away from the
origin.

<figure id="Figure_03_03_002">

</figure>

To describe the behavior as numbers become larger and larger, we use the
idea of infinity. We use the symbol ∞ for positive infinity and −∞ for
negative infinity. When we say that " x approaches infinity," which can
be symbolically written as x→∞, we are describing a behavior; we are
saying that x is increasing without bound.

With the positive even-power function, as the input increases or
decreases without bound, the output values become very large, positive
numbers. Equivalently, we could describe this behavior by saying that as
x approaches positive or negative infinity, the f( x ) values increase
without bound. In symbolic form, we could write

$$\text{as~}x\rightarrow \pm \infty,~f(x)\rightarrow\infty$$

[\#](#) shows the graphs of f(x)= x 3 ,g(x)= x 5 , and h(x)= x 7 , which
are all power functions with odd, whole-number powers. Notice that these
graphs look similar to the cubic function in the toolkit. Again, as the
power increases, the graphs flatten near the origin and become steeper
away from the origin.

<figure id="Figure_03_03_003">

</figure>

These examples illustrate that functions of the form f( x )= x n reveal
symmetry of one kind or another. First, in [\#](#) we see that even
functions of the form f( x )= x n , n even, are symmetric about the y-
axis. In [\#](#) we see that odd functions of the form f( x )= x n , n
 odd, are symmetric about the origin.

For these odd power functions, as x approaches negative infinity, f( x )
decreases without bound. As x approaches positive infinity, f( x )
increases without bound. In symbolic form we write

$$\begin{array}{l}
{\text{as}~x\rightarrow - \infty,~f(x)\rightarrow - \infty~} \\
{\text{as}~x\rightarrow\infty,~f(x)\rightarrow\infty}
\end{array}$$

The behavior of the graph of a function as the input values get very
small ( x→−∞ ) and get very large ( x→∞ ) is referred to as the end
behavior of the function. We can use words or symbols to describe end
behavior.

[\#](#) shows the end behavior of power functions in the form f(x)=k x n
where n is a non-negative integer depending on the power and the
constant.

<figure id="Figure_03_03_004abcd">

</figure>

:::: {#fs-id1165135161436 .note}
::: title
:::

How To

*Given a power function f(x)=k x n where* n *is a positive integer,
identify the end behavior.*

Determine whether the power is even or odd.

Determine whether the constant is positive or negative.

Use

to identify the end behavior.
::::

::: {#Example_03_03_02 .example}
Describe the end behavior of the graph of f(x)= x 8 .

The coefficient is 1 (positive) and the exponent of the power function
is 8 (an even number). As x approaches infinity, the output (value of
f(x) ) increases without bound. We write as x→∞,f(x)→∞. As x approaches
negative infinity, the output increases without bound. In symbolic form,
as x→−∞, f(x)→∞. We can graphically represent the function as shown in
[\#](#).

<figure id="Figure_03_03_008">

</figure>
:::

::: {#Example_03_03_03 .example}
Describe the end behavior of the graph of f(x)=− x 9 .

The exponent of the power function is 9 (an odd number). Because the
coefficient is --1 (negative), the graph is the reflection about the x-
axis of the graph of f(x)= x 9 . [\#](#) shows that as x approaches
infinity, the output decreases without bound. As x approaches negative
infinity, the output increases without bound. In symbolic form, we would
write

$$\begin{array}{l}
{\text{as}~x\rightarrow-\infty,~f(x)\rightarrow\infty~} \\
{\text{as}~x\rightarrow\infty,~f(x)\rightarrow-\infty}
\end{array}$$

<figure id="Figure_03_03_009">

</figure>

We can check our work by using the table feature on a graphing utility.

  x      f( x )
  ------ -----------------
  --10   1,000,000,000
  --5    1,953,125
  0      0
  5      --1,953,125
  10     --1,000,000,000

We can see from [\#](#) that, when we substitute very small values for
x, the output is very large, and when we substitute very large values
for x, the output is very small (meaning that it is a very large
negative value).
:::

:::: {#fs-id1165137626838 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Describe in words and symbols the end behavior of f(x)=−5 x 4 .

As x approaches positive or negative infinity, f( x ) decreases without
bound: as x→±∞, f(x)→−∞ because of the negative coefficient.
::::

# Identifying Polynomial Functions {#fs-id1165134069294}

An oil pipeline bursts in the Gulf of Mexico, causing an oil slick in a
roughly circular shape. The slick is currently 24 miles in radius, but
that radius is increasing by 8 miles each week. We want to write a
formula for the area covered by the oil slick by combining two
functions. The radius r of the spill depends on the number of weeks w
that have passed. This relationship is linear.

$$r(w) = 24 + 8w$$

We can combine this with the formula for the area A of a circle.

$$A(r) = \pi r^{2}$$

Composing these functions gives a formula for the area in terms of
weeks.

$$\begin{array}{ccl}
{A(w)} & = & {A(r(w))} \\
 & = & {A(24 + 8w)} \\
 & = & {\pi{(24 + 8w)}^{2}}
\end{array}$$

Multiplying gives the formula.

$$A(w) = 576\pi + 384\pi w + 64\pi w^{2}$$

This formula is an example of a *polynomial function*. A polynomial
function consists of either zero or the sum of a finite number of
non-zero terms, each of which is a product of a number, called
the coefficient of the term, and a variable raised to a non-negative
integer power.

:::: {#fs-id1165137715427 .note}
::: title
Polynomial Functions
:::

Let n be a non-negative integer. A polynomial function is a function
that can be written in the form

$$f(x) = a_{n}x^{n} + ... + a_{2}x^{2} + a_{1}x + a_{0}$$

This is called the general form of a polynomial function. Each a i is a
coefficient and can be any real number, but a n ≠ 0 . Each expression a
i x i is a term of a polynomial function.
::::

::: {#Example_03_03_04 .example}
Which of the following are polynomial functions?

$$\begin{array}{rcl}
{f(x)} & = & {2x^{3} \cdot 3x + 4} \\
{g(x)} & = & {- x(x^{2} - 4)} \\
{h(x)} & = & {5\sqrt{x + 2}}
\end{array}$$

The first two functions are examples of polynomial functions because
they can be written in the form f(x)= a n x n +\...+ a 2 x 2 + a 1 x+ a
0 , where the powers are non-negative integers and the coefficients are
real numbers.

f

(

x

)

can be written as

f

(

x

)

=

6

x

4

\+

4\.

g

(

x

)

can be written as

g

(

x

)

=

−

x

3

\+

4

x

.

h

(

x

)

cannot be written in this form and is therefore not a polynomial
function.
:::

# Identifying the Degree and Leading Coefficient of a Polynomial Function {#fs-id1165135508329}

Because of the form of a polynomial function, we can see an infinite
variety in the number of terms and the power of the variable. Although
the order of the terms in the polynomial function is not important for
performing operations, we typically arrange the terms in descending
order of power, or in general form. The degree of the polynomial is the
highest power of the variable that occurs in the polynomial; it is the
power of the first variable if the function is in general form. The
leading term is the term containing the highest power of the variable,
or the term with the highest degree. The leading coefficient is the
coefficient of the leading term.

:::: {#fs-id1165135193124 .note}
::: title
Terminology of Polynomial Functions
:::

We often rearrange polynomials so that the powers are descending.

When a polynomial is written in this way, we say that it is in general
form.
::::

:::: {#fs-id1165134031372 .note}
::: title
:::

How To

*Given a polynomial function, identify the degree and leading
coefficient.*

Find the highest power of

x

to determine the degree of the function.

Identify the term containing the highest power of

x

to find the leading term.

Identify the coefficient of the leading term.
::::

::: {#Example_03_03_05 .example}
Identify the degree, leading term, and leading coefficient of the
following polynomial functions.

$$\begin{array}{ccl}
{f(x)} & = & {3 + 2x^{2} - 4x^{3}} \\
{g(t)} & = & {5t^{5} - 2t^{3} + 7t} \\
{h(p)} & = & {6p - p^{3} - 2}
\end{array}$$

For the function f( x ), the highest power of x is 3, so the degree is
3. The leading term is the term containing that degree, −4 x 3 . The
leading coefficient is the coefficient of that term, −4.

For the function g( t ), the highest power of t is 5, so the degree is
5. The leading term is the term containing that degree, 5 t 5 . The
leading coefficient is the coefficient of that term, 5.

For the function h( p ), the highest power of p is 3, so the degree is
3. The leading term is the term containing that degree, −p 3 . The
leading coefficient is the coefficient of that term, −1.
:::

:::: {#fs-id1165137534935 .note}
::: title
:::

Q&A

Identify the degree, leading term, and leading coefficient of the
polynomial f(x)=4 x 2 − x 6 +2x−6.

The degree is 6. The leading term is − x 6 . The leading coefficient is
−1.
::::

## Identifying End Behavior of Polynomial Functions {#fs-id1165137702213}

Knowing the degree of a polynomial function is useful in helping us
predict its end behavior. To determine its end behavior, look at the
leading term of the polynomial function. Because the power of the
leading term is the highest, that term will grow significantly faster
than the other terms as x gets very large or very small, so its behavior
will dominate the graph. For any polynomial, the end behavior of the
polynomial will match the end behavior of the power function consisting
of the leading term. See [\#](#).

        Polynomial Function        Leading Term   Graph of Polynomial Function
  -------------------------------- -------------- ------------------------------
       f(x)=5 x 4 +2 x 3 −x−4      5 x 4          
   f(x)=−2 x 6 − x 5 +3 x 4 + x 3  −2 x 6         
    f(x)=3 x 5 −4 x 4 +2 x 2 +1    3 x 5          
      f(x)=−6 x 3 +7 x 2 +3x+1     −6 x 3         

::: {#Example_03_03_06 .example}
Describe the end behavior and determine a possible degree of the
polynomial function in [\#](#).

<figure id="Figure_03_03_015">

</figure>

As the input values x get very large, the output values f(x) increase
without bound. As the input values x get very small, the output values
f(x) decrease without bound. We can describe the end behavior
symbolically by writing

$$\begin{array}{l}
{\text{as}~x\rightarrow-\infty,~f(x)\rightarrow-\infty~} \\
{\text{as}~x\rightarrow\infty,~f(x)\rightarrow\infty}
\end{array}$$

In words, we could say that as x values approach infinity, the function
values approach infinity, and as x values approach negative infinity,
the function values approach negative infinity.

We can tell this graph has the shape of an odd degree power function
that has not been reflected, so the degree of the polynomial creating
this graph must be odd and the leading coefficient must be positive.
:::

:::: {#fs-id1165137470875 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Describe the end behavior, and determine a possible degree of the
polynomial function in [\#](#).

<figure id="Figure_03_03_016">

</figure>

As x→∞, f(x)→−∞; as x→−∞, f(x)→−∞. It has the shape of an even degree
power function with a negative coefficient.
::::

::: {#Example_03_03_07 .example}
Given the function f(x)=−3 x 2 (x−1)(x+4), express the function as a
polynomial in general form, and determine the leading term, degree, and
end behavior of the function.

Obtain the general form by expanding the given expression for f( x ).

$$\begin{array}{ccl}
{f(x)} & = & {-3x^{2}(x - 1)(x + 4)} \\
 & = & {-3x^{2}\left( {x^{2} + 3x - 4} \right)} \\
 & = & {-3x^{4} - 9x^{3} + 12x^{2}}
\end{array}$$

The general form is f( x )=−3 x 4 −9 x 3 +12 x 2 . The leading term is
−3 x 4 ; therefore, the degree of the polynomial is 4. The degree is
even (4) and the leading coefficient is negative (--3), so the end
behavior is

$$\begin{array}{l}
{\text{as}~x\rightarrow - \infty,~f(x)\rightarrow - \infty~} \\
{\text{as}~x\rightarrow\infty,~f(x)\rightarrow - \infty}
\end{array}$$
:::

:::: {#fs-id1165137647092 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Given the function f(x)=0.2(x−2)(x+1)(x−5), express the function as a
polynomial in general form and determine the leading term, degree, and
end behavior of the function.

The leading term is 0.2 x 3 , so it is a degree 3 polynomial. As x
approaches positive infinity, f( x ) increases without bound; as x
approaches negative infinity, f( x ) decreases without bound.
::::

## Identifying Local Behavior of Polynomial Functions {#fs-id1165137735781}

In addition to the end behavior of polynomial functions, we are also
interested in what happens in the "middle" of the function. In
particular, we are interested in locations where graph behavior changes.
A *turning point* is a point at which the function values change from
increasing to decreasing or decreasing to increasing.

We are also interested in the intercepts. As with all functions, the
*y-*intercept is the point at which the graph intersects the vertical
axis. The point corresponds to the coordinate pair in which the input
value is zero. Because a polynomial is a function, only one output value
corresponds to each input value so there can be only one *y-*intercept
(0, a 0 ). The *x-*intercepts occur at the input values that correspond
to an output value of zero. It is possible to have more than one
*x-*intercept. See [\#](#)*.*

<figure id="Figure_03_03_017">

</figure>

:::: {#fs-id1165135378843 .note}
::: title
Intercepts and Turning Points of Polynomial Functions
:::

A turning point of a graph is a point at which the graph changes
direction from increasing to decreasing or decreasing to increasing. The
*y-*intercept is the point at which the function has an input value of
zero. The *x*-intercepts are the points at which the output value is
zero.
::::

:::: {#fs-id1165137766902 .note}
::: title
:::

How To

*Given a polynomial function, determine the intercepts.*

Determine the

y-

intercept by setting

x

=

0

and finding the corresponding output value.

Determine the

x

-intercepts by solving for the input values that yield an output value
of zero.
::::

::: {#Example_03_03_08 .example}
Given the polynomial function f(x)=(x−2)(x+1)(x−4), written in factored
form for your convenience, determine the *y*- and *x*-intercepts.

The *y-*intercept occurs when the input is zero so substitute 0 for x.

$$\begin{array}{ccl}
{f(0)} & = & {f(0) = (0 - 2)(0 + 1)(0 - 4)} \\
 & = & {( - 2)(1)( - 4)} \\
 & = & 8
\end{array}$$

The *y-*intercept is (0, 8).

The *x*-intercepts occur when the output is zero.

$$0 = (x - 2)(x + 1)(x - 4)$$

$$\begin{array}{rclcrclcrcl}
{x - 2} & = & 0 & {\qquad\text{or}\qquad} & {x + 1} & = & 0 & {\qquad\text{or}\qquad} & {x - 4} & = & 0 \\
x & = & 2 & {\qquad\text{or}\qquad} & x & = & -1 & {\qquad\text{or}\qquad} & x & = & 4
\end{array}$$

The *x*-intercepts are (2,0),(--1,0), and (4,0).

We can see these intercepts on the graph of the function shown in
[\#](#).

<figure id="Figure_03_03_018">

</figure>
:::

::: {#Example_03_03_09 .example}
Given the polynomial function f(x)= x 4 −4 x 2 −45, determine the *y*-
and *x*-intercepts.

The *y-*intercept occurs when the input is zero.

$$\begin{array}{ccl}
{f(0)} & = & {{(0)}^{4} - 4{(0)}^{2} - 45} \\
 & = & -45
\end{array}$$

The *y-*intercept is (0,−45).

The *x*-intercepts occur when the output is zero. To determine when the
output is zero, we will need to factor the polynomial.

$$\begin{array}{ccl}
{f(x)} & = & {x^{4} - 4x^{2} - 45} \\
 & = & {\left( {x^{2} - 9} \right)\left( {x^{2} + 5} \right)} \\
 & = & {(x - 3)(x + 3)\left( {x^{2} + 5} \right)}
\end{array}$$

$$\qquad{0 = (x - 3)(x + 3)\left( {x^{2} + 5} \right)}$$

$$\begin{array}{rclcrclcc}
{x - 3} & = & 0 & {\qquad\text{or}\qquad} & {x + 3} & = & 0 & {\qquad\text{or}\qquad} & {x^{2} + 5 = 0} \\
x & = & 3 & {\qquad\text{or}\qquad} & x & = & {- 3} & {\qquad\text{or}\qquad} & {(\text{no~real~solution)}}
\end{array}$$

The *x*-intercepts are (3,0) and (--3,0).

We can see these intercepts on the graph of the function shown in
[\#](#). We can see that the function is even because f( x )=f( −x ).

<figure id="Figure_03_03_019">

</figure>
:::

:::: {#fs-id1165137749604 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Given the polynomial function f(x)=2 x 3 −6 x 2 −20x, determine the *y*-
and *x*-intercepts.

*y*-intercept (0,0); *x*-intercepts (0,0),(--2,0), and (5,0)
::::

## Comparing Smooth and Continuous Graphs {#fs-id1165134080932}

The degree of a polynomial function helps us to determine the number of
*x*-intercepts and the number of turning points. A polynomial function
of nth degree is the product of n factors, so it will have at most n
roots or zeros, or *x*-intercepts. The graph of the polynomial function
of degree n must have at most n--1 turning points. This means the graph
has at most one fewer turning point than the degree of the polynomial or
one fewer than the number of factors.

A continuous function has no breaks in its graph: the graph can be drawn
without lifting the pen from the paper. A smooth curve is a graph that
has no sharp corners. The turning points of a smooth graph must always
occur at rounded curves. The graphs of polynomial functions are both
continuous and smooth.

:::: {#fs-id1165137847104 .note}
::: title
Intercepts and Turning Points of Polynomials
:::

A polynomial of degree n will have, at most, n *x*-intercepts and n−1
turning points.
::::

::: {#Example_03_03_10 .example}
Without graphing the function, determine the local behavior of the
function by finding the maximum number of *x*-intercepts and turning
points for f(x)=−3 x 10 +4 x 7 − x 4 +2 x 3 .

The polynomial has a degree of 10, so there are at most 10
*x*-intercepts and at most 9 turning points.
:::

:::: {#fs-id1165137628834 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Without graphing the function, determine the maximum number of
*x*-intercepts and turning points for f(x)=108−13 x 9 −8 x 4 +14 x 12 +2
x 3 .

There are at most 12 x- intercepts and at most 11 turning points.
::::

::: {#Example_03_03_11 .example}
What can we conclude about the polynomial represented by the graph shown
in [\#](#) based on its intercepts and turning points?

<figure id="Figure_03_03_020">

</figure>

The end behavior of the graph tells us this is the graph of an
even-degree polynomial. See [\#](#).

<figure id="Figure_03_03_021">

</figure>

The graph has 2 *x*-intercepts, suggesting a degree of 2 or greater, and
3 turning points, suggesting a degree of 4 or greater. Based on this, it
would be reasonable to conclude that the degree is even and at least 4.
:::

:::: {#fs-id1165137871106 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

What can we conclude about the polynomial represented by the graph shown
in [\#](#) based on its intercepts and turning points?

<figure id="Figure_03_03_022">

</figure>

The end behavior indicates an odd-degree polynomial function; there are
3 x- intercepts and 2 turning points, so the degree is odd and at least
3. Because of the end behavior, we know that the lead coefficient must
be negative.
::::

::: {#Example_03_03_12 .example}
Given the function f(x)=−4x( x+3 )( x−4 ), determine the local behavior.

The *y*-intercept is found by evaluating f(0).

$$\begin{matrix}
{f(0)} & = & {- 4(0)(0 + 3)(0 - 4} \\
 & = & 0
\end{matrix}$$

The *y*-intercept is (0,0).

The *x*-intercepts are found by determining the zeros of the function.

$$0 = -4x(x + 3)(x - 4)$$

$$\begin{matrix}
x & = & 0 & {\qquad\text{or}\qquad} & {x + 3} & = & 0 & {\qquad\text{or}\qquad} & {x - 4} & = & 0 \\
x & = & 0 & {\qquad\text{or}\qquad} & x & = & {- 3} & {\qquad\text{or}\qquad} & x & = & 4
\end{matrix}$$

The *x*-intercepts are (0,0),(--3,0), and (4,0).

The degree is 3 so the graph has at most 2 turning points.
:::

:::: {#fs-id1165137661075 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Given the function f(x)=0.2(x−2)(x+1)(x−5), determine the local
behavior.

The x- intercepts are (2,0),(−1,0), and (5,0), the *y-*intercept is
(0,2), and the graph has at most 2 turning points.
::::

:::: {#fs-id1165137653058 .note}
::: title
:::

Media

Access these online resources for additional instruction and practice
with power and polynomial functions.

Find Key Information about a Given Polynomial Function

End Behavior of a Polynomial Function

Turning Points and

x

\-

intercepts of Polynomial Functions

Least Possible Degree of a Polynomial Function
::::

# Key Equations {#fs-id1165137724050}

  ---------------------------------------
  general form of a polynomial function
  ---------------------------------------

# Key Concepts {#fs-id1165137731646}

A power function is a variable base raised to a number power. See

.

The behavior of a graph as the input decreases beyond bound and
increases beyond bound is called the end behavior.

The end behavior depends on whether the power is even or odd. See

and

.

A polynomial function is the sum of terms, each of which consists of a
transformed power function with positive whole number power. See

.

The degree of a polynomial function is the highest power of the variable
that occurs in a polynomial. The term containing the highest power of
the variable is called the leading term. The coefficient of the leading
term is called the leading coefficient. See

.

The end behavior of a polynomial function is the same as the end
behavior of the power function represented by the leading term of the
function. See

and

.

A polynomial of degree

n

will have at most

n

x-

intercepts and at most

n

−

1

turning points. See

,

,

,

, and

.

# Section Exercises {#fs-id1165137553381}

## Verbal {#fs-id1165137761271}

Explain the difference between the coefficient of a power function and
its degree.

The coefficient of the power function is the real number that is
multiplied by the variable raised to a power. The degree is the highest
power appearing in the function.

If a polynomial function is in factored form, what would be a good first
step in order to determine the degree of the function?

In general, explain the end behavior of a polynomial with odd degree if
the leading coefficient is positive.

As x decreases without bound, so does f( x ). As x increases without
bound, so does f( x ).

What is the relationship between the degree of a polynomial function and
the maximum number of turning points in its graph?

What can we conclude if, in general, the graph of a polynomial function
exhibits the following end behavior? As x→−∞,f(x)→−∞ and as x→∞,f(x)→−∞.

The polynomial function is of even degree and leading coefficient is
negative.

## Algebraic {#fs-id1165135444041}

For the following exercises, identify the function as a power function,
a polynomial function, or neither.

f(x)= x 5

f(x)= ( x 2 ) 3

Power function

f(x)=x− x 4

f(x)= x 2 x 2 −1

Neither

f(x)=2x( x+2 ) ( x−1 ) 2

f(x)= 3 x+1

Neither

For the following exercises, find the degree and leading coefficient for
the given polynomial.

−3x 4

7−2 x 2

Degree = 2, Coefficient = --2

−2 x 2 −3 x 5 +x−6 

x( 4− x 2 )(2x+1)

Degree =4, Coefficient = --2

x 2 ( 2x−3 ) 2

For the following exercises, determine the end behavior of the
functions.

f( x )= x 4

As x→∞, f(x)→∞,asx→−∞,f(x)→∞

f( x )= x 3

f( x )=− x 4

As x→−∞, f(x)→−∞,asx→∞,f(x)→−∞

f( x )=− x 9

f(x)=−2 x 4 −3 x 2 +x−1 

As x→−∞, f(x)→−∞,asx→∞,f(x)→−∞

f(x)=3 x 2 +x−2

f(x)= x 2 ( 2 x 3 −x+1 )

As x→∞, f(x)→∞,asx→−∞,f(x)→−∞

f(x)= (2−x) 7

For the following exercises, find the intercepts of the functions.

f( t )=2( t−1 )( t+2 )(t−3)

*y*-intercept is (0,12), *t*-intercepts are (1,0);(--2,0);and (3,0).

g( n )=−2( 3n−1 )(2n+1)

f(x)= x 4 −16

*y*-intercept is (0,−16). *x*-intercepts are (2,0) and (−2,0).

f(x)= x 3 +27

f(x)=x( x 2 −2x−8 )

*y*-intercept is (0,0). *x*-intercepts are (0,0),(4,0), and ( −2, 0 ).

f(x)=(x+3)( 4 x 2 −1 )

## Graphical {#fs-id1165135416569}

For the following exercises, determine the least possible degree of the
polynomial function shown.

3

5

3

5

For the following exercises, determine whether the graph of the function
provided is a graph of a polynomial function. If so, determine the
number of turning points and the least possible degree for the function.

Yes. Number of turning points is 2. Least possible degree is 3.

Yes. Number of turning points is 1. Least possible degree is 2.

Yes. Number of turning points is 0. Least possible degree is 1.

Yes. Number of turning points is 0. Least possible degree is 1.

## Numeric {#fs-id1165134130094}

For the following exercises, make a table to confirm the end behavior of
the function.

f(x)=− x 3

f(x)= x 4 −5 x 2

  x       f( x )
  ------- ------------
  10      9,500
  100     99,950,000
  --10    9,500
  --100   99,950,000

As x→−∞, f(x)→∞,asx→∞,f(x)→∞

f(x)= x 2 ( 1−x ) 2

f(x)=(x−1)(x−2)(3−x)

  x       f( x )
  ------- -----------
  10      --504
  100     --941,094
  --10    1,716
  --100   1,061,106

As x→−∞, f(x)→∞,asx→∞,f(x)→−∞

f(x)= x 5 10 − x 4

## Technology {#fs-id1165137755588}

For the following exercises, graph the polynomial functions using a
calculator. Based on the graph, determine the intercepts and the end
behavior.

f(x)= x 3 (x−2)

The y- intercept is ( 0, 0 ). The x- intercepts are ( 0, 0 ),( 2, 0 ).
As x→−∞, f(x)→∞,asx→∞,f(x)→∞

f(x)=x(x−3)(x+3)

f(x)=x(14−2x)(10−2x)

The y- intercept is ( 0,0 ) . The x- intercepts are ( 0, 0 ),( 5, 0 ),(
7, 0 ). As x→−∞, f(x)→−∞,asx→∞,f(x)→∞

f(x)=x(14−2x) (10−2x) 2

f(x)= x 3 −16x

The y- intercept is ( 0, 0 ). The x- intercept is ( −4, 0 ),( 0, 0 ),(
4, 0 ). Asx→−∞, f(x)→−∞,asx→∞,f(x)→∞

f(x)= x 3 −27

f(x)= x 4 −81

The y- intercept is ( 0, −81 ). The x- intercept are ( 3, 0 ),( −3, 0 ).
As x→−∞, f(x)→∞,asx→∞,f(x)→∞

f(x)=− x 3 + x 2 +2x

f(x)= x 3 −2 x 2 −15x

The y- intercept is ( 0, 0 ). The x- intercepts are ( −3, 0 ),( 0, 0 ),(
5, 0 ). As x→−∞, f(x)→−∞,asx→∞,f(x)→∞

f(x)= x 3 −0.01x

## Extensions {#fs-id1165137811752}

For the following exercises, use the information about the graph of a
polynomial function to determine the function. Assume the leading
coefficient is 1 or --1. There may be more than one correct answer.

The y- intercept is (0,−4). The x- intercepts are (−2,0), (2,0). Degree
is 2.

End behavior: as x→−∞, f(x)→∞; as x→∞, f(x)→∞.

f(x)= x 2 −4

The y- intercept is (0,9). The x- intercepts are (−3,0), (3,0). Degree
is 2.

End behavior: as x→−∞, f(x)→−∞, as x→∞, f(x)→−∞.

The y- intercept is (0,0). The x- intercepts are (0,0), (2,0). Degree is
3.

End behavior: as x→−∞, f(x)→−∞, as x→∞, f(x)→∞.

f(x)= x 3 −4 x 2 +4x

The y- intercept is (0,1). The x- intercept is (1,0). Degree is 3.

End behavior: as x→−∞, f(x)→∞, as x→∞, f(x)→−∞.

The y- intercept is (0,1). There is no x- intercept. Degree is 4.

End behavior: as x→−∞, f(x)→∞, as x→∞, f(x)→∞.

f(x)= x 4 +1

## Real-World Applications {#fs-id1165134085635}

For the following exercises, use the written statements to construct a
polynomial function that represents the required information.

An oil slick is expanding as a circle. The radius of the circle is
increasing at the rate of 20 meters per day. Express the area of the
circle as a function of d, the number of days elapsed.

A cube has an edge of 3 feet. The edge is increasing at the rate of 2
feet per minute. Express the volume of the cube as a function of m, the
number of minutes elapsed.

V(m)=8 m 3 +36 m 2 +54m+27

A rectangle has a length of 10 inches and a width of 6 inches. If the
length is increased by x inches and the width increased by twice that
amount, express the area of the rectangle as a function of x.

An open box is to be constructed by cutting out square corners of x-
inch sides from a piece of cardboard 8 inches by 8 inches and then
folding up the sides. Express the volume of the box as a function of x.

V(x)=4 x 3 −32 x 2 +64x

A rectangle is twice as long as it is wide. Squares of side 2 feet are
cut out from each corner. Then the sides are folded up to make an open
box. Express the volume of the box as a function of the width ( x ).

# 

coefficient

a nonzero real number multiplied by a variable raised to an exponent

continuous function

a function whose graph can be drawn without lifting the pen from the
paper because there are no breaks in the graph

degree

the highest power of the variable that occurs in a polynomial

end behavior

the behavior of the graph of a function as the input decreases without
bound and increases without bound

leading coefficient

the coefficient of the leading term

leading term

the term containing the highest power of the variable

polynomial function

a function that consists of either zero or the sum of a finite number of
non-zero terms, each of which is a product of a number, called
the coefficient of the term, and a variable raised to a non-negative
integer power.

power function

a function that can be represented in the form

f

(

x

)

=

k

x

p

where

k

is a constant, the base is a variable, and the exponent,

p

, is a constant

smooth curve

a graph with no sharp corners

term of a polynomial function

any

a

i

x

i

of a polynomial function in the form

f

(

x

)

=

a

n

x

n

\+

\...

\+

a

2

x

2

\+

a

1

x

\+

a

0

turning point

the location at which the graph of a function changes direction
