m51276

> In this section, you will:
>
> Recognize characteristics of graphs of polynomial functions.
>
> Use factoring to ﬁnd zeros of polynomial functions.
>
> Identify zeros and their multiplicities.
>
> Determine end behavior.
>
> Understand the relationship between degree and turning points.
>
> Graph polynomial functions.
>
> Use the Intermediate Value Theorem.

644f6a93-7429-4768-8752-eccf5fb8e0bb

#  {#eip-744}

## Learning Objectives {#eip-688}

Recognize and use the appropriate method to factor a polynomial
completely (IA 6.4.1)

Solve a quadratic equation by factoring (IA 6.5.2)

## Objective 1: Recognize and use the appropriate method to factor a polynomial completely (IA 6.4.1). {#eip-414}

The following outline provides a good strategy for factoring
polynomials.

### Practice Makes Perfect {#eip-739}

Recognize and use the appropriate method to factor a polynomial
completely.

24x2-46x+10

t7-t3

y3+5y2-4y-20

12m2+20m+3

3r3-3

3m2-9mn-30n2

x3-x2-30x

## Objective 2: Solve a quadratic equation by factoring (IA 6.5.2) {#eip-139}

If ab=0 , where a and b represent real numbers. What can you say about a
and b ?

The Zero Product Property states that if ab=0 , then a=0 , or b=0 , or
both.

We can use this property to solve equations.

:::: {#eip-317 .note}
::: title
How To Use the Zero Product Property
:::

Set each factor equal to zero.

Solve the linear equations.

Check.
::::

::: {#eip-715 .example}
Solve (4x-1)(x+6)=0

4x-1orx+6=04x=1x=-6x=14
:::

### Practice Makes Perfect {#eip-286}

Solve

(x-5)(2x+3)=0

x(2x-5)=0

::: {#eip-915 .example}
x2-2x=63

How is this problem different from practice problems 8 and 9 above? What
should be our first step?

  ---------------------------------------------------------------------------- --------------------------
  Write the equation in standard form so that one side of the equation is 0.   x2-2x-63=0
  Factor the quadratic expression completely.                                  (x-9)(x+7)=0
  Set each factor containing a variable equal to 0.                            x-9=0x+7=0
  Solve the resulting equations.                                               x=9x=-7
  Check each solution in the original equation.                                92-2(9)=63(-7)2-2(-7)=63
  ---------------------------------------------------------------------------- --------------------------
:::

### Practice Makes Perfect {#eip-334}

Solve a quadratic equation by factoring.

Use the zero factor property to solve each of the following exercises.

4x2-25=0

6x2=12x

2x2-2=-3x

(2x+3)(x+1)=15

5f(5f-16)=-15

The revenue in millions of dollars for a fictional cable company from
2006 through 2013 is shown in [\#](#)*.*

  ------------ ------ ------ ------ ------ ------ ------ ------ ------
  *Year*       2006   2007   2008   2009   2010   2011   2012   2013
  *Revenues*   52.4   52.8   51.2   49.5   48.6   48.6   48.7   47.1
  ------------ ------ ------ ------ ------ ------ ------ ------ ------

The revenue can be modeled by the polynomial function

$$R(t) = - 0.037t^{4} + 1.414t^{3} - 19.777t^{2} + 118.696t - 205.332$$

where R represents the revenue in millions of dollars and t represents
the year, with t=6 corresponding to 2006. Over which intervals is the
revenue for the company increasing? Over which intervals is the revenue
for the company decreasing? These questions, along with many others, can
be answered by examining the graph of the polynomial function. We have
already explored the local behavior of quadratics, a special case of
polynomials. In this section we will explore the local behavior of
polynomials in general.

# Recognizing Characteristics of Graphs of Polynomial Functions {#fs-id1165135510712}

Polynomial functions of degree 2 or more have graphs that do not have
sharp corners; recall that these types of graphs are called smooth
curves. Polynomial functions also display graphs that have no breaks.
Curves with no breaks are called continuous. [\#](#) shows a graph that
represents a polynomial function and a graph that represents a function
that is not a polynomial.

<figure id="Figure_03_04_001">

</figure>

::: {#Example_03_04_01 .example}
Which of the graphs in [\#](#) represents a polynomial function?

<figure id="Figure_03_04_002">

</figure>

The graphs of f and h are graphs of polynomial functions. They are
smooth and continuous.

The graphs of g and k are graphs of functions that are not polynomials.
The graph of function g has a sharp corner. The graph of function k is
not continuous.
:::

:::: {#fs-id1165134164967 .note}
::: title
:::

Q&A

*Do all polynomial functions have as their domain all real numbers?*

*Yes. Any real number is a valid input for a polynomial function.*
::::

# Using Factoring to Find Zeros of Polynomial Functions {#fs-id1165137553880}

Recall that if f is a polynomial function, the values of x for which f(
x )=0 are called zeros of f. If the equation of the polynomial function
can be factored, we can set each factor equal to zero and solve for the
zeros*.*

We can use this method to find x- intercepts because at the x-
intercepts we find the input values when the output value is zero. For
general polynomials, this can be a challenging prospect. While
quadratics can be solved using the relatively simple quadratic formula,
the corresponding formulas for cubic and fourth-degree polynomials are
not simple enough to remember, and formulas do not exist for general
higher-degree polynomials. Consequently, we will limit ourselves to
three cases:

The polynomial can be factored using known methods: greatest common
factor and trinomial factoring.

The polynomial is given in factored form.

Technology is used to determine the intercepts.

:::: {#fs-id1165137640937 .note}
::: title
:::

How To

*Given a polynomial function f, find the *x*-intercepts by factoring.*

Set

f

(

x

)

=

0\.

If the polynomial function is not given in factored form:

Factor out any common monomial factors.

Factor any factorable binomials or trinomials.

Set each factor equal to zero and solve to find the

x

\-

intercepts.
::::

::: {#Example_03_04_02 .example}
Find the *x*-intercepts of f(x)= x 6 −3 x 4 +2 x 2 .

We can attempt to factor this polynomial to find solutions for f( x )=0.

$$\begin{array}{rclc}
{x^{6} - 3x^{4} + 2x^{2}} & = & 0 & {\qquad\begin{array}{l}
\text{Factor~out~the~greatest} \\
{\text{common~factor}\text{.}}
\end{array}} \\
{x^{2}\left( x^{4} - 3x^{2} + 2 \right)} & = & 0 & {\qquad\text{Factor~the~trinomial}\text{.}} \\
{x^{2}\left( x^{2} - 1 \right)\left( x^{2} - 2 \right)} & = & 0 & {\qquad\text{Set~each~factor~equal~to~zero}\text{.}}
\end{array}$$

$$\begin{array}{ccccrclcrcl}
 & & & & \left( x^{2} - 1 \right) & = & 0 & & \left( x^{2} - 2 \right) & = & 0 \\
x^{2} & = & 0 & {\qquad\text{or}} & x^{2} & = & 1 & {\qquad\text{or}} & x^{2} & = & 2 \\
x & = & 0 & & x & = & \pm 1 & & x & = & {\pm \sqrt{2}}
\end{array}$$

This gives us five *x*-intercepts: (0,0),(1,0),(−1,0),( 2 ,0), and (− 2
,0). See [\#](#). We can see that this is an even function because it is
symmetric about the *y*-axis.

<figure id="Figure_03_04_003">

</figure>
:::

::: {#Example_03_04_03 .example}
Find the *x*-intercepts of f(x)= x 3 −5 x 2 −x+5.

Find solutions for f(x)=0 by factoring.

$$\begin{array}{rcll}
{x^{3} - 5x^{2} - x + 5} & = & 0 & {\qquad\text{Factor~by~grouping}\text{.}} \\
{x^{2}(x - 5) - (x - 5)} & = & 0 & {\qquad\text{Factor~out~the~common~factor}\text{.}} \\
{\left( x^{2} - 1 \right)(x - 5)} & = & 0 & {\qquad\text{Factor~the~difference~of~squares}\text{.}} \\
{(x + 1)(x - 1)(x - 5)} & = & 0 & {\qquad\text{Set~each~factor~equal~to~zero}\text{.}}
\end{array}$$

$$\begin{array}{rclcrclcrcl}
{x + 1} & = & 0 & {\qquad\text{or}\qquad} & {x - 1} & = & 0 & {\qquad\text{or}\qquad} & {x - 5} & = & 0 \\
x & = & -1 & & x & = & 1 & & x & = & 5
\end{array}$$

There are three *x*-intercepts: (−1,0),(1,0), and ( 5,0 ). See [\#](#).

<figure id="Figure_03_04_004">

</figure>
:::

::: {#Example_03_04_04 .example}
Find the *y*- and *x*-intercepts of g(x)= (x−2) 2 (2x+3).

The *y*-intercept can be found by evaluating g( 0 ).

$$\begin{array}{ccl}
{g(0)} & = & {{(0 - 2)}^{2}(2(0) + 3)} \\
 & = & 12
\end{array}$$

So the *y*-intercept is (0,12).

The *x*-intercepts can be found by solving g( x )=0.

$${(x - 2)}^{2}(2x + 3) = 0$$

$$\begin{array}{rclcccc}
{(x - 2)}^{2} & = & 0 & & {(2x + 3)} & = & 0 \\
{x - 2} & = & 0 & {\qquad\text{or}\qquad} & x & = & {- \frac{3}{2}} \\
x & = & 2 & & & & 
\end{array}$$

So the *x*-intercepts are (2,0) and ( − 3 2 ,0 ).

We can always check that our answers are reasonable by using a graphing
calculator to graph the polynomial as shown in [\#](#).

<figure id="Figure_03_04_005">

</figure>
:::

::: {#Example_03_04_05 .example}
Find the *x*-intercepts of h(x)= x 3 +4 x 2 +x−6.

This polynomial is not in factored form, has no common factors, and does
not appear to be factorable using techniques previously discussed.
Fortunately, we can use technology to find the intercepts. Keep in mind
that some values make graphing difficult by hand. In these cases, we can
take advantage of graphing utilities.

Looking at the graph of this function, as shown in [\#](#), it appears
that there are *x*-intercepts at x=−3,−2, and 1.

<figure id="Figure_03_04_006">

</figure>

We can check whether these are correct by substituting these values for
x and verifying that

$$h( - 3) = h( - 2) = h(1) = 0$$

Since h(x)= x 3 +4 x 2 +x−6, we have:

$$\begin{array}{rcl}
{h(-3)} & = & {{(-3)}^{3} + 4{(-3)}^{2} + (-3) - 6 = -27 + 36 - 3 - 6 = 0} \\
{h(-2)} & = & {{(-2)}^{3} + 4{(-2)}^{2} + (-2) - 6 = -8 + 16 - 2 - 6 = 0} \\
{h(1)} & = & {{(1)}^{3} + 4{(1)}^{2} + (1) - 6 = 1 + 4 + 1 - 6 = 0}
\end{array}$$

Each *x*-intercept corresponds to a zero of the polynomial function and
each zero yields a factor, so we can now write the polynomial in
factored form.

$$\begin{array}{ccl}
{h(x)} & = & {x^{3} + 4x^{2} + x - 6} \\
 & = & {(x + 3)(x + 2)(x - 1)}
\end{array}$$
:::

:::: {#fs-id1165134224517 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Find the *y*- and *x*-intercepts of the function f(x)= x 4 −19 x 2 +30x.

*y*-intercept (0,0); *x*-intercepts (0,0),(--5,0),(2,0), and (3,0)
::::

# Identifying Zeros and Their Multiplicities {#fs-id1165135252152}

Graphs behave differently at various *x*-intercepts. Sometimes, the
graph will cross over the horizontal axis at an intercept. Other times,
the graph will touch the horizontal axis and \"bounce\" off.

Suppose, for example, we graph the function shown.

$$f(x) = (x + 3){(x - 2)}^{2}{(x + 1)}^{3}$$

Notice in [\#](#) that the behavior of the function at each of the
*x*-intercepts is different.

<figure id="Figure_03_04_007">

</figure>

The *x*-intercept x=−3 is the solution of equation (x+3)=0. The graph
passes directly through the *x*-intercept at x=−3. The factor is linear
(has a degree of 1), so the behavior near the intercept is like that of
a line---it passes directly through the intercept. We call this a single
zero because the zero corresponds to a single factor of the function.

The *x*-intercept x=2 is the repeated solution of equation (x−2) 2 =0.
The graph touches the axis at the intercept and changes direction. The
factor is quadratic (degree 2), so the behavior near the intercept is
like that of a quadratic---it bounces off of the horizontal axis at the
intercept.

$${(x - 2)}^{2} = (x - 2)(x - 2)$$

The factor is repeated, that is, the factor ( x−2 ) appears twice. The
number of times a given factor appears in the factored form of the
equation of a polynomial is called the multiplicity. The zero associated
with this factor, x=2, has multiplicity 2 because the factor ( x−2 )
occurs twice.

The *x*-intercept x=−1 is the repeated solution of factor (x+1) 3 =0.
The graph passes through the axis at the intercept, but flattens out a
bit first. This factor is cubic (degree 3), so the behavior near the
intercept is like that of a cubic---with the same S-shape near the
intercept as the toolkit function f( x )= x 3 . We call this a triple
zero, or a zero with multiplicity 3.

For zeros with even multiplicities, the graphs *touch* or are tangent to
the *x*-axis. For zeros with odd multiplicities, the graphs *cross* or
intersect the *x*-axis. See [\#](#) for examples of graphs of polynomial
functions with multiplicity 1, 2, and 3.

<figure id="Figure_03_04_008">

</figure>

For higher even powers, such as 4, 6, and 8, the graph will still touch
and bounce off of the horizontal axis but, for each increasing even
power, the graph will appear flatter as it approaches and leaves the
*x*-axis.

For higher odd powers, such as 5, 7, and 9, the graph will still cross
through the horizontal axis, but for each increasing odd power, the
graph will appear flatter as it approaches and leaves the *x*-axis.

:::: {#fs-id1165135620829 .note}
::: title
Graphical Behavior of Polynomials at *x*-Intercepts
:::

If a polynomial contains a factor of the form (x−h) p , the behavior
near the x- intercept h is determined by the power p. We say that x=h is
a zero of multiplicity p.

The graph of a polynomial function will touch the *x*-axis at zeros with
even multiplicities. The graph will cross the *x*-axis at zeros with odd
multiplicities.

The sum of the multiplicities is the degree of the polynomial function.
::::

:::: {#fs-id1165135195409 .note}
::: title
:::

How To

*Given a graph of a polynomial function of degree* n, *identify the
zeros and their multiplicities.*

If the graph crosses the

x

-axis and appears almost linear at the intercept, it is a single zero.

If the graph touches the

x

-axis and bounces off of the axis, it is a zero with even multiplicity.

If the graph crosses the

x

-axis at a zero, it is a zero with odd multiplicity.

The sum of the multiplicities is

≤

n

.
::::

::: {#Example_03_04_06 .example}
Use the graph of the function of degree 6 in [\#](#) to identify the
zeros of the function and their possible multiplicities.

<figure id="Figure_03_04_009">

</figure>

The polynomial function is of degree 6. The sum of the multiplicities
must be 6.

Starting from the left, the first zero occurs at x=−3. The graph touches
the *x*-axis, so the multiplicity of the zero must be even. The zero of
−3 most likely has multiplicity 2.

The next zero occurs at x=−1. The graph looks almost linear at this
point. This is a single zero of multiplicity 1.

The last zero occurs at x=4. The graph crosses the *x*-axis, so the
multiplicity of the zero must be odd. We know that the multiplicity is
likely 3 and that the sum of the multiplicities is 6.
:::

:::: {#fs-id1165137932352 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Use the graph of the function of degree 9 in [\#](#) to identify the
zeros of the function and their multiplicities.

<figure id="Figure_03_04_010">

</figure>

The graph has a zero of --5 with multiplicity 3, a zero of -1 with
multiplicity 2, and a zero of 3 with multiplicity 4.
::::

# Determining End Behavior {#fs-id1165135256009}

As we have already learned, the behavior of a graph of a polynomial
function of the form

$$f(x) = a_{n}x^{n} + a_{n - 1}x^{n - 1} + ... + a_{1}x + a_{0}$$

will either ultimately rise or fall as x increases without bound and
will either rise or fall as x decreases without bound. This is because
for very large inputs, say 100 or 1,000, the leading term dominates the
size of the output. The same is true for very small inputs, say --100 or
--1,000.

Recall that we call this behavior the *end behavior* of a function. As
we pointed out when discussing quadratic equations, when the leading
term of a polynomial function, a n x n , is an even power function, as x
increases or decreases without bound, f(x) increases without bound. When
the leading term is an odd power function, as x decreases without bound,
f(x) also decreases without bound; as x increases without bound, f(x)
also increases without bound. If the leading term is negative, it will
change the direction of the end behavior. [\#](#) summarizes all four
cases.

<figure id="Figure_03_04_011abcd">

</figure>

# Understanding the Relationship between Degree and Turning Points {#fs-id1165134393046}

In addition to the end behavior, recall that we can analyze a polynomial
function's local behavior. It may have a turning point where the graph
changes from increasing to decreasing (rising to falling) or decreasing
to increasing (falling to rising). Look at the graph of the polynomial
function f(x)= x 4 − x 3 −4 x 2 +4x in [\#](#). The graph has three
turning points.

<figure id="Figure_03_04_015">

</figure>

This function f is a 4th degree polynomial function and has 3 turning
points. The maximum number of turning points of a polynomial function is
always one less than the degree of the function.

:::: {#fs-id1165135502799 .note}
::: title
Interpreting Turning Points
:::

A turning point is a point of the graph where the graph changes from
increasing to decreasing (rising to falling) or decreasing to increasing
(falling to rising).

A polynomial of degree n will have at most n−1 turning points.
::::

::: {#Example_03_04_07 .example}
Find the maximum number of turning points of each polynomial function.

ⓐ

f

(

x

)

=

−

x

3

\+

4

x

5

−

3

x

2

\+

1

ⓑ

f

(

x

)

=

−

(

x

−

1

)

2

(

1

\+

2

x

2

)

ⓐ

First, rewrite the polynomial function in descending order: f(x)=4 x 5 −
x 3 −3 x 2 +1

Identify the degree of the polynomial function. This polynomial function
is of degree 5.

The maximum number of turning points is 5−1=4.

ⓑ

First, identify the leading term of the polynomial function if the
function were expanded.

Then, identify the degree of the polynomial function. This polynomial
function is of degree 4.

The maximum number of turning points is 4−1=3.
:::

# Graphing Polynomial Functions {#fs-id1165137843090}

We can use what we have learned about multiplicities, end behavior, and
turning points to sketch graphs of polynomial functions. Let us put this
all together and look at the steps required to graph polynomial
functions.

:::: {#fs-id1165137843101 .note}
::: title
:::

How To

*Given a polynomial function, sketch the graph.*

Find the intercepts.

Check for symmetry. If the function is an even function, its graph is
symmetrical about the

y

\-

axis, that is,

f

(

−

x

)

=

f

(

x

)

.

If a function is an odd function, its graph is symmetrical about the
origin, that is,

f

(

−

x

)

=

−

f

(

x

)

.

Use the multiplicities of the zeros to determine the behavior of the
polynomial at the

x

\-

intercepts.

Determine the end behavior by examining the leading term.

Use the end behavior and the behavior at the intercepts to sketch a
graph.

Ensure that the number of turning points does not exceed one less than
the degree of the polynomial.

Optionally, use technology to check the graph.
::::

::: {#Example_03_04_08 .example}
Sketch a graph of f(x)=−2 (x+3) 2 (x−5).

This graph has two *x*-intercepts. At x=−3, the factor is squared,
indicating a multiplicity of 2. The graph will bounce at this
*x*-intercept. At x=5, the function has a multiplicity of one,
indicating the graph will cross through the axis at this intercept.

The *y*-intercept is found by evaluating f(0).

$$\begin{array}{ccl}
{f(0)} & = & {-2{(0 + 3)}^{2}(0 - 5)} \\
 & = & {-2 \cdot 9 \cdot (-5)} \\
 & = & 90
\end{array}$$

The *y*-intercept is (0,90).

Additionally, we can see the leading term, if this polynomial were
multiplied out, would be −2 x 3 , so the end behavior is that of a
vertically reflected cubic, with the outputs decreasing as the inputs
approach infinity, and the outputs increasing as the inputs approach
negative infinity. See [\#](#).

<figure id="Figure_03_04_017">

</figure>

To sketch this, we consider that:

As

x

→

−

∞

the function

f

(

x

)

→

∞

,

so we know the graph starts in the second quadrant and is decreasing
toward the

x

\-

axis.

Since

f

(

−

x

)

=

−2

(

−

x

\+

3

)

2

(

−

x

--

5

)

is not equal to

f

(

x

)

,

the graph does not display symmetry.

At

(

−

3

,

0

)

,

the graph bounces off of the

x

-axis, so the function must start increasing.

At ( 0,90 ), the graph crosses the *y*-axis at the *y*-intercept. See
[\#](#).

<figure id="Figure_03_04_018">

</figure>

Somewhere after this point, the graph must turn back down or start
decreasing toward the horizontal axis because the graph passes through
the next intercept at ( 5,0 ). See [\#](#).

<figure id="Figure_03_04_019">

</figure>

As x→∞ the function f(x)→−∞, so we know the graph continues to decrease,
and we can stop drawing the graph in the fourth quadrant.

Using technology, we can create the graph for the polynomial function,
shown in [\#](#), and verify that the resulting graph looks like our
sketch in [\#](#).

<figure id="Figure_03_04_020">

</figure>
:::

:::: {#fs-id1165133065128 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Sketch a graph of f(x)= 1 4 x (x−1) 4 (x+3) 3 .
::::

# Using the Intermediate Value Theorem {#fs-id1165137843206}

In some situations, we may know two points on a graph but not the zeros.
If those two points are on opposite sides of the *x*-axis, we can
confirm that there is a zero between them. Consider a polynomial
function f whose graph is smooth and continuous. The Intermediate Value
Theorem states that for two numbers a and b in the domain of f, if a\<b
and f( a )≠f( b ), then the function f takes on every value between f( a
) and f( b ). (While the theorem is intuitive, the proof is actually
quite complicated and requires higher mathematics.) We can apply this
theorem to a special case that is useful in graphing polynomial
functions. If a point on the graph of a continuous function f at x=a
lies above the x- axis and another point at x=b lies below the x- axis,
there must exist a third point between x=a and x=b where the graph
crosses the x- axis. Call this point ( c,f( c ) ). This means that we
are assured there is a solution c where f( c )=0.

In other words, the Intermediate Value Theorem tells us that when a
polynomial function changes from a negative value to a positive value,
the function must cross the x- axis. [\#](#) shows that there is a zero
between a and b.

<figure id="Figure_03_04_022">

</figure>

:::: {#fs-id1165135347510 .note}
::: title
Intermediate Value Theorem
:::

Let f be a polynomial function. The Intermediate Value Theorem states
that if f( a ) and f( b ) have opposite signs, then there exists at
least one value c between a and b for which f( c )=0.
::::

::: {#Example_03_04_09 .example}
Show that the function f(x)= x 3 −5 x 2 +3x+6 has at least two real
zeros between x=1 and x=4.

As a start, evaluate f(x) at the integer values x=1,2,3, and 4. See
[\#](#).

  ---------- --- --- ----- ---
     *x*     1   2   3     4
    *f(x)*   5   0   --3   2
  ---------- --- --- ----- ---

We see that one zero occurs at x=2. Also, since f(3) is negative and
f(4) is positive, by the Intermediate Value Theorem, there must be at
least one real zero between 3 and 4.

We have shown that there are at least two real zeros between x=1 and
x=4.

We can also see on the graph of the function in [\#](#) that there are
two real zeros between x=1 and x=4.

<figure id="Figure_03_04_023">

</figure>
:::

:::: {#fs-id1165135551156 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Show that the function f(x)=7 x 5 −9 x 4 − x 2 has at least one real
zero between x=1 and x=2.

Because f is a polynomial function and since f(1) is negative and f(2)
is positive, there is at least one real zero between x=1 and x=2.
::::

## Writing Formulas for Polynomial Functions {#fs-id1165135369116}

Now that we know how to find zeros of polynomial functions, we can use
them to write formulas based on graphs. Because a polynomial function
written in factored form will have an *x*-intercept where each factor is
equal to zero, we can form a function that will pass through a set of
*x*-intercepts by introducing a corresponding set of factors.

:::: {#fs-id1165133320785 .note}
::: title
Factored Form of Polynomials
:::

If a polynomial of degree p that can be factored into strictly linear
factors has horizontal intercepts at x= x 1 , x 2 ,..., x n , then the
polynomial can be written in the factored form: f(x)=a (x− x 1 ) p 1 (x−
x 2 ) p 2 ⋯ (x− x n ) p n where the powers p i on each factor can be
determined by the behavior of the graph at the corresponding intercept,
and the stretch factor a can be determined given a value of the function
other than the *x*-intercept.
::::

:::: {#fs-id1165135580289 .note}
::: title
:::

How To

*Given a graph of a polynomial function, write a formula for the
function.*

Identify the

x

-intercepts of the graph to find the factors of the polynomial.

Examine the behavior of the graph at the

x

-intercepts to determine the multiplicity of each factor.

Find the polynomial of least degree containing all the factors found in
the previous step.

Use any other point on the graph (the

y

-intercept may be easiest) to determine the stretch factor.
::::

::: {#Example_03_04_10 .example}
Write a formula for the polynomial function shown in [\#](#).

<figure id="Figure_03_04_024">

</figure>

This graph has three *x*-intercepts: x=−3,2, and 5. The *y*-intercept is
located at (0,−2). At x=−3 and x=5, the graph passes through the axis
linearly, suggesting the corresponding factors of the polynomial will be
linear. At x=2, the graph bounces at the intercept, suggesting the
corresponding factor of the polynomial will be second degree
(quadratic). Together, this gives us

$$f(x) = a(x + 3){(x - 2)}^{2}(x - 5)$$

To determine the stretch factor, we utilize another point on the graph.
We will use the y- intercept (0,--2), to solve for a.

$$\begin{array}{rcl}
{f(0)} & = & {a(0 + 3){(0 - 2)}^{2}(0 - 5)} \\
-2 & = & {a(0 + 3){(0 - 2)}^{2}(0 - 5)} \\
-2 & = & {- 60a} \\
a & = & \frac{1}{30}
\end{array}$$

The graphed polynomial appears to represent the function f(x)= 1 30
(x+3) (x−2) 2 (x−5).
:::

:::: {#fs-id1165135203378 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Given the graph shown in [\#](#), write a formula for the function
shown.

<figure id="Figure_03_04_025">

</figure>

f(x)=− 1 8 (x−2) 3 (x+1) 2 (x−4)
::::

## Using Local and Global Extrema {#fs-id1165135440065}

With quadratics, we were able to algebraically find the maximum or
minimum value of the function by finding the vertex. For general
polynomials, finding these turning points is not possible without more
advanced techniques from calculus. Even then, finding where extrema
occur can still be algebraically challenging. For now, we will estimate
the locations of turning points using technology to generate a graph.

Each turning point represents a local minimum or maximum. Sometimes, a
turning point is the highest or lowest point on the entire graph. In
these cases, we say that the turning point is a global maximum or a
global minimum. These are also referred to as the absolute maximum and
absolute minimum values of the function.

:::: {#fs-id1165133248530 .note}
::: title
Local and Global Extrema
:::

A local maximum or local minimum at x=a (sometimes called the relative
maximum or minimum, respectively) is the output at the highest or lowest
point on the graph in an open interval around x=a. If a function has a
local maximum at a, then f(a)≥f(x) for all x in an open interval around
x=a. If a function has a local minimum at a, then f(a)≤f(x) for all x in
an open interval around x=a.

A global maximum or global minimum is the output at the highest or
lowest point of the function. If a function has a global maximum at a,
then f(a)≥f(x) for all x. If a function has a global minimum at a, then
f(a)≤f(x) for all x.

We can see the difference between local and global extrema in [\#](#).

<figure id="Figure_03_04_026">

</figure>
::::

:::: {#fs-id1165135347671 .note}
::: title
:::

Q&A

*Do all polynomial functions have a global minimum or maximum?*

*No. Only polynomial functions of even degree have a global minimum or
maximum. For example, f( x )=x has neither a global maximum nor a global
minimum.*
::::

::: {#Example_03_04_11 .example}
An open-top box is to be constructed by cutting out squares from each
corner of a 14 cm by 20 cm sheet of plastic and then folding up the
sides. Find the size of squares that should be cut out to maximize the
volume enclosed by the box.

We will start this problem by drawing a picture like that in [\#](#),
labeling the width of the cut-out squares with a variable, w.

<figure id="Figure_03_04_027">

</figure>

Notice that after a square is cut out from each end, it leaves a ( 14−2w
) cm by ( 20−2w ) cm rectangle for the base of the box, and the box will
be w cm tall. This gives the volume

$$\begin{array}{ccl}
{V(w)} & = & {(20 - 2w)(14 - 2w)w} \\
 & = & {280w - 68w^{2} + 4w^{3}}
\end{array}$$

Notice, since the factors are w, 20--2w and 14--2w, the three zeros are
10, 7, and 0, respectively. Because a height of 0 cm is not reasonable,
we consider the only the zeros 10 and 7. The shortest side is 14 and we
are cutting off two squares, so values w may take on are greater than
zero or less than 7. This means we will restrict the domain of this
function to 0\<w\<7. Using technology to sketch the graph of V( w ) on
this reasonable domain, we get a graph like that in [\#](#). We can use
this graph to estimate the maximum value for the volume, restricted to
values for w that are reasonable for this problem---values from 0 to 7.

<figure id="Figure_03_04_028">

</figure>

From this graph, we turn our focus to only the portion on the reasonable
domain, \[ 0,7 \]. We can estimate the maximum value to be around 340
cubic cm, which occurs when the squares are about 2.75 cm on each side.
To improve this estimate, we could use advanced features of our
technology, if available, or simply change our window to zoom in on our
graph to produce [\#](#).

<figure id="Figure_03_04_029">

</figure>

From this zoomed-in view, we can refine our estimate for the maximum
volume to about 339 cubic cm, when the squares measure approximately 2.7
cm on each side.
:::

:::: {#fs-id1165134199271 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Use technology to find the maximum and minimum values on the interval
\[−1,4\] of the function f(x)=−0.2 (x−2) 3 (x+1) 2 (x−4).

The minimum occurs at approximately the point (0,−6.5), and the maximum
occurs at approximately the point (3.5,7).
::::

:::: {#fs-id1165132947398 .note}
::: title
:::

Media

Access the following online resource for additional instruction and
practice with graphing polynomial functions.

Intermediate Value Theorem
::::

# Key Concepts {#fs-id1165137846268}

Polynomial functions of degree 2 or more are smooth, continuous
functions. See

.

To find the zeros of a polynomial function, if it can be factored,
factor the function and set each factor equal to zero. See

,

,

and

.

Another way to find the

x

\-

intercepts of a polynomial function is to graph the function and
identify the points at which the graph crosses the

x

\-

axis. See

.

The multiplicity of a zero determines how the graph behaves at the

x

\-

intercepts. See

.

The graph of a polynomial will cross the horizontal axis at a zero with
odd multiplicity.

The graph of a polynomial will touch the horizontal axis at a zero with
even multiplicity.

The end behavior of a polynomial function depends on the leading term.

The graph of a polynomial function changes direction at its turning
points.

A polynomial function of degree

n

has at most

n

−

1

turning points. See

.

To graph polynomial functions, find the zeros and their multiplicities,
determine the end behavior, and ensure that the final graph has at most

n

−

1

turning points. See

and

.

Graphing a polynomial function helps to estimate local and global
extremas. See

.

The Intermediate Value Theorem tells us that if

f

(

a

)

and

f

(

b

)

have opposite signs, then there exists at least one value

c

between

a

and

b

for which

f

(

c

)

=

0\.

See

.

# Section Exercises {#fs-id1165135559507}

## Verbal {#fs-id1165135559511}

What is the difference between an x- intercept and a zero of a
polynomial function f?

The x- intercept is where the graph of the function crosses the x- axis,
and the zero of the function is the input value for which f(x)=0.

If a polynomial function of degree n has n distinct zeros, what do you
know about the graph of the function?

Explain how the Intermediate Value Theorem can assist us in finding a
zero of a function.

If we evaluate the function at a and at b and the sign of the function
value changes, then we know a zero exists between a and b.

Explain how the factored form of the polynomial helps us in graphing it.

If the graph of a polynomial just touches the *x*-axis and then changes
direction, what can we conclude about the factored form of the
polynomial?

There will be a factor raised to an even power.

## Algebraic {#fs-id1165135621860}

For the following exercises, find the x- or *t*-intercepts of the
polynomial functions.

C( t )=2( t−4 )( t+1 )(t−6)

C( t )=3( t+2 )( t−3 )(t+5)

(−2,0),(3,0),(−5,0)

C( t )=4t ( t−2 ) 2 (t+1)

C( t )=2t( t−3 ) ( t+1 ) 2

(3,0),(−1,0),(0,0)

C( t )=2 t 4 −8 t 3 +6 t 2

C( t )=4 t 4 +12 t 3 −40 t 2

( 0,0 ),( −5,0 ),( 2,0 )

f(x)= x 4 − x 2

f(x)= x 3 + x 2 −20x

( 0,0 ),( −5,0 ),( 4,0 )

f(x)= x 3 +6 x 2 −7x

f(x)= x 3 + x 2 −4x−4

( 2,0 ),( −2,0 ),( −1,0 )

f(x)= x 3 +2 x 2 −9x−18

f(x)=2 x 3 − x 2 −8x+4

(−2,0),(2,0),( 1 2 ,0 )

f(x)= x 6 −7 x 3 −8

f(x)=2 x 4 +6 x 2 −8

( 1,0 ),( −1,0 )

f(x)= x 3 −3 x 2 −x+3

f(x)= x 6 −2 x 4 −3 x 2

(0,0),( 3 ,0),(− 3 ,0)

f(x)= x 6 −3 x 4 −4 x 2

f(x)= x 5 −5 x 3 +4x

( 0,0 ),( 1,0 ), ( −1,0 ),( 2,0 ),( −2,0 )

For the following exercises, use the Intermediate Value Theorem to
confirm that the given polynomial has at least one zero within the given
interval.

f(x)= x 3 −9x, between x=−4 and x=−2.

f(x)= x 3 −9x, between x=2 and x=4.

f( 2 )=--10 and f( 4 )=28. Sign change confirms.

f(x)= x 5 −2x, between x=1 and x=2.

f(x)=− x 4 +4, between x=1 and x=3 .

f( 1 )=3 and f( 3 )=--77. Sign change confirms.

f(x)=−2 x 3 −x, between x=--1 and x=1.

f(x)= x 3 −100x+2, between x=0.01 and x=0.1

f( 0.01 )=1.000001 and f( 0.1 )=--7.999. Sign change confirms.

For the following exercises, find the zeros and give the multiplicity of
each.

f(x)= ( x+2 ) 3 ( x−3 ) 2

f(x)= x 2 ( 2x+3 ) 5 ( x−4 ) 2

0 with multiplicity 2, − 3 2 with multiplicity 5, 4 with multiplicity 2

f(x)= x 3 ( x−1 ) 3 ( x+2 )

f(x)= x 2 ( x 2 +4x+4 )

0 with multiplicity 2, --2 with multiplicity 2

f(x)= ( 2x+1 ) 3 ( 9 x 2 −6x+1 )

f(x)= ( 3x+2 ) 5 ( x 2 −10x+25 )

− 2 3 with multiplicity 5, 5 with multiplicity 2

f(x)=x( 4 x 2 −12x+9 )( x 2 +8x+16 )

f(x)= x 6 − x 5 −2 x 4

0 with multiplicity 4, 2 with multiplicity 1, −1 with multiplicity 1

f(x)=3 x 4 +6 x 3 +3 x 2

f(x)=4 x 5 −12 x 4 +9 x 3

3 2 with multiplicity 2, 0 with multiplicity 3

f(x)=2 x 4 ( x 3 −4 x 2 +4x )

f(x)=4 x 4 ( 9 x 4 −12 x 3 +4 x 2 )

0withmultiplicity6, 2 3 withmultiplicity2

## Graphical {#fs-id1165131857449}

For the following exercises, graph the polynomial functions. Note x- and
y- intercepts, multiplicity, and end behavior.

f( x )= ( x+3 ) 2 (x−2)

g( x )=( x+4 ) ( x−1 ) 2

*x*-intercepts, ( 1, 0 ) with multiplicity 2, ( --4, 0 ) with
multiplicity 1, y- intercept ( 0, 4 ). As x→−∞,f(x)→−∞,asx→∞,f(x)→∞.

h( x )= ( x−1 ) 3 ( x+3 ) 2

k( x )= ( x−3 ) 3 ( x−2 ) 2

*x*-intercepts (3,0) with multiplicity 3, (2,0) with multiplicity 2, y-
intercept (0,--108). As x→−∞,f(x)→−∞,asx→∞,f(x)→∞.

m( x )=−2x( x−1 )(x+3)

n( x )=−3x( x+2 )(x−4)

*x*-intercepts ( 0, 0 ),( --2, 0 ),( 4,0 ) with multiplicity 1, y-
intercept (0, 0). As x→−∞,f(x)→∞,asx→∞,f(x)→−∞.

For the following exercises, use the graphs to write the formula for a
polynomial function of least degree.

f(x)=− 2 9 (x−3)(x+1)(x+3)

f(x)= 1 4 (x+2) 2 (x−3)

For the following exercises, use the graph to identify zeros and
multiplicity.

--4, --2, 1, 3 with multiplicity 1

--2, 3 each with multiplicity 2

For the following exercises, use the given information about the
polynomial graph to write the equation.

Degree 3. Zeros at x=--2, x=1, and x=3. *y*-intercept at (0,--4).

f(x)=− 2 3 (x+2)(x−1)(x−3)

Degree 3. Zeros at x=--5, x=--2, and x=1. *y*-intercept at (0,6)

Degree 5. Roots of multiplicity 2 at x=3 and x=1 , and a root of
multiplicity 1 at x=--3. *y*-intercept at (0,9)

f(x)= 1 3 (x−3) 2 (x−1) 2 (x+3)

Degree 4. Root of multiplicity 2 at x=4, and a roots of multiplicity 1
at x=1 and x=--2. *y*-intercept at (0,--3).

Degree 5. Double zero at x=1, and triple zero at x=3. Passes through the
point (2,15).

f(x)=−15 (x−1) 2 (x−3) 3

Degree 3. Zeros at x=4, x=3, and x=2. *y*-intercept at ( 0,−24 ).

Degree 3. Zeros at x=−3, x=−2 and x=1. *y*-intercept at (0,12).

f(x)=−2( x+3 )( x+2 )( x−1 )

Degree 5. Roots of multiplicity 2 at x=−3 and x=2 and a root of
multiplicity 1 at x=−2.

*y*-intercept at ( 0, 4 ).

Degree 4. Roots of multiplicity 2 at x= 1 2 and roots of multiplicity 1
at x=6 and x=−2.

*y*-intercept at ( 0,18 ).

f(x)=− 3 2 ( 2x−1 ) 2 ( x−6 )( x+2 )

Double zero at x=−3 and triple zero at x=0. Passes through the point
(1,32).

## Technology {#fs-id1165133005583}

For the following exercises, use a calculator to approximate local
minima and maxima or the global minimum and maximum.

f(x)= x 3 −x−1

local max ( --.58, --.62 ), local min ( .58, --1.38 )

f(x)=2 x 3 −3x−1

f(x)= x 4 +x

global min ( --.63, --.47 )

f(x)=− x 4 +3x−2

f(x)= x 4 − x 3 +1

global min (.75, .89)

## Extensions {#fs-id1165134402666}

For the following exercises, use the graphs to write a polynomial
function of least degree.

f(x)= (x−500) 2 (x+200)

## Real-World Applications {#fs-id1165137694933}

For the following exercises, write the polynomial function that models
the given situation.

A rectangle has a length of 10 units and a width of 8 units. Squares of
x by x units are cut out of each corner, and then the sides are folded
up to create an open box. Express the volume of the box as a polynomial
function in terms of x.

f(x)=4 x 3 −36 x 2 +80x

Consider the same rectangle of the preceding problem. Squares of 2x by
2x units are cut out of each corner. Express the volume of the box as a
polynomial in terms of x.

A square has sides of 12 units. Squares x+1 by x+1 units are cut out of
each corner, and then the sides are folded up to create an open box.
Express the volume of the box as a function in terms of x.

f(x)=4 x 3 −36 x 2 +60x+100

A cylinder has a radius of x+2 units and a height of 3 units greater.
Express the volume of the cylinder as a polynomial function.

A right circular cone has a radius of 3x+6 and a height 3 units less.
Express the volume of the cone as a polynomial function. The volume of a
cone is V= 1 3 π r 2 h for radius r and height h.

f(x)=9π( x 3 +5 x 2 +8x+4)

# 

global maximum

highest turning point on a graph;

f

(

a

)

where

f

(

a

)

≥

f

(

x

)

for all

x

.

global minimum

lowest turning point on a graph;

f

(

a

)

where

f

(

a

)

≤

f

(

x

)

for all

x

.

Intermediate Value Theorem

for two numbers

a

and

b

in the domain of

f

,

if

a

\<

b

and

f

(

a

)

≠

f

(

b

)

,

then the function

f

takes on every value between

f

(

a

)

and

f

(

b

)

; specifically, when a polynomial function changes from a negative value
to a positive value, the function must cross the

x

\-

axis

multiplicity

the number of times a given factor appears in the factored form of the
equation of a polynomial; if a polynomial contains a factor of the form

(

x

−

h

)

p

,

x

=

h

is a zero of multiplicity

p

.
