m51277

> In this section, you will:
>
> Use long division to divide polynomials.
>
> Use synthetic division to divide polynomials.

11f2bd05-8eff-4fb8-9e06-02a657fbb031

#  {#eip-660}

## Learning Objectives {#eip-248}

Dividing polynomials using long division (IA 5.4.3)

Dividing polynomials using synthetic division (IA 5.4.4)

## Objective 1: Dividing polynomials using long division (IA 5.4.3) {#eip-980}

To divide a polynomial by a binomial, we follow a procedure very similar
to long division of numbers. So, let's look carefully at the steps we
take when we divide a 3-digit number, 875, by a 2-digit number, 25.

::: {#eip-420 .example}
When we divided 875 by 25, we had no remainder. But sometimes division
of numbers does leave a remainder.
:::

### Practice Makes Perfect {#eip-604}

Vocabulary of the example.

Fill in the blanks.

When dividing 69 by 4,

the *dividend* is\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_,

the *divisor* is\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_,

the *quotient* is\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_,

and the *remainder* is\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_.

We check division by multiplying the quotient by the divisor and adding
the remainder.

::: {#eip-413 .example}
Find the quotient: (x2+9x+20)÷(x+5).

  ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ --
                                                                                                                                                         
  Write it as a long division problem.Be sure the dividend is written in descending order of powers, with no missing terms.                              
  Divide x2 by x. It may help to ask yourself, "What do I needto multiply x by to get x2 ?"                                                              
  Put the answer, x, in the quotient over the x term.Multiply x times x+5. Line up the like terms under the dividend.                                    
  Subtract x2+5x from x2+9x. You may find it easier to change the signs and then add.Then bring down the last term, 20.                                  
  Divide 4x by x. It may help to ask yourself, "What do Ineed to multiply x by to get 4x ?"Put the answer, 4 , in the quotient over the constant term.   
  Multiply 4 times x+5.                                                                                                                                  
  Subtract 4x+20 from 4x+20.                                                                                                                             
  Check:Multiply the quotient by the divisor. (x+4)(x+5) You should get the dividend. x2+9x+20✓                                                          
  ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ --
:::

### Practice Makes Perfect {#eip-518}

Divide using long division of polynomials: (x2+10x+21)÷(x+3)

Sometimes division of polynomials, just like division of numbers, leaves
a remainder. We write the *remainder* as a fraction with the divisor as
the denominator.

Also, if you look back at the dividends in previous examples, you will
notice that the terms were written in *descending order of degrees*, and
there were *no missing degrees*.

::: {#eip-760 .example}
(5x+x4-x2-6)÷(x+2)

Notice, this polynomial is not in descending order and it is missing x3
term. We need to write it in the correct order and add 0x3 as a
placeholder.

<figure id="eip-idm297568864">

</figure>

To check, multiply divisor by the quotient and add remainder
(x+2)(x3-2x2+3x-1)-4

The result should be x4-x2+5x-6
:::

### Practice Makes Perfect {#eip-460}

Dividing polynomials using long division.

(7x+x4-7x2+6)÷(x+3)

(x3-8)÷(x-2)

## Objective 2: Dividing polynomials using synthetic division (IA 5.4.4) {#eip-59}

As you probably noticed, long division can be tedious. Synthetic
division uses the patterns from long division as a basis to make a
process much simpler by leaving the variable terms out. The same example
in synthetic division format is shown next.

<figure id="eip-idm309800592">

</figure>

Synthetic division only works when the divisor is of the form (x−c).

::: {#eip-500 .example}
Use synthetic division to find the quotient and remainder when
x4-16x2+3x+12 is divided by x+4. Note that the divisor is in the form
x-(-4), so use c as the divisor.

The polynomial x4-16x2+3x+12 has its term in order with descending
degree but we notice there is no x3term. We will add a 0 as a
placeholder for the x3 term.

<figure id="fs-idm241293040">

</figure>

We divided a 4th degree polynomial by a 1st degree polynomial so the
quotient will be a 3rd degree polynomial. Reading from the third row,
the quotient has the coefficients 1,−4,0, and 3, which is x3-4x2+0x+3  .
The remainder is 0.
:::

### Practice Makes Perfect {#eip-963}

Dividing polynomials using synthetic division.

Let f(x)=x4-5x2+4x+12

ⓐ

Find

f

(

2

)

ⓑ

Divide

f

(

x

)

by

(

x

\-

2

)

. What is the quotient? What is the remainder?

Let f(x)=x3+2x2-5x-6

ⓐ

Find

f

(

−3

)

ⓑ

Divide

f

(

x

)

by

(

x

\+

3

)

. What is the quotient? What is the remainder?

What is the connection between f(c) and the remainder when f(x) is
divided by (x-c) ? Summarize your findings.

<figure id="Figure_03_05_001">

</figure>

The exterior of the Lincoln Memorial in Washington, D.C., is a large
rectangular solid with length 61.5 meters (m), width 40 m, and height 30
m.[^1] We can easily find the volume using elementary geometry.

$$\begin{array}{ccl}
V & = & {l \cdot w \cdot h} \\
 & = & {61.5 \cdot 40 \cdot 30} \\
 & = & 73,800
\end{array}$$

So the volume is 73,800 cubic meters ( m³ ). Suppose we knew the volume,
length, and width. We could divide to find the height.

$$\begin{array}{ccl}
h & = & \frac{V}{l \cdot w} \\
 & = & \frac{73,800}{61.5 \cdot 40} \\
 & = & 30
\end{array}$$

As we can confirm from the dimensions above, the height is 30 m. We can
use similar methods to find any of the missing dimensions. We can also
use the same method if any, or all, of the measurements contain variable
expressions. For example, suppose the volume of a rectangular solid is
given by the polynomial 3 x 4 −3 x 3 −33 x 2 +54x. The length of the
solid is given by 3x; the width is given by x−2. To find the height of
the solid, we can use polynomial division, which is the focus of this
section.

# Using Long Division to Divide Polynomials {#fs-id1165137676949}

We are familiar with the long division algorithm for ordinary
arithmetic. We begin by dividing into the digits of the dividend that
have the greatest place value. We divide, multiply, subtract, include
the digit in the next place value position, and repeat. For example,
let's divide 178 by 3 using long division.

Another way to look at the solution is as a sum of parts. This should
look familiar, since it is the same method used to check division in
elementary arithmetic.

$$\begin{array}{ccl}
\text{dividend} & = & {(\text{divisor} \cdot \text{quotient)~+~remainder}} \\
178 & = & {(3 \cdot 59) + 1} \\
 & = & {177 + 1} \\
 & = & 178
\end{array}$$

We call this the *Division Algorithm* and will discuss it more formally
after looking at an example.

Division of polynomials that contain more than one term has similarities
to long division of whole numbers. We can write a polynomial dividend as
the product of the divisor and the quotient added to the remainder. The
terms of the polynomial division correspond to the digits (and place
values) of the whole number division. This method allows us to divide
two polynomials. For example, if we were to divide 2 x 3 −3 x 2 +4x+5 by
x+2 using the long division algorithm, it would look like this:

We have found

$$\frac{2x^{3} - 3x^{2} + 4x + 5}{x + 2} = 2x^{2} - 7x + 18 - \frac{31}{x + 2}$$

or

$${2x^{3} - 3x^{2} + 4x + 5} = (x + 2)(2x^{2} - 7x + 18) - 31$$

We can identify the dividend, the divisor, the quotient, and the
remainder.

Writing the result in this manner illustrates the Division Algorithm.

:::: {#fs-id1165135508595 .note}
::: title
The Division Algorithm
:::

The Division Algorithm states that, given a polynomial dividend f(x) and
a non-zero polynomial divisor d(x) where the degree of d(x) is less than
or equal to the degree of f(x) , there exist unique polynomials q(x) and
r(x) such that

$$f(x) = d(x)q(x) + r(x)$$

q(x) is the quotient and r(x) is the remainder. The remainder is either
equal to zero or has degree strictly less than d(x).

If r(x)=0, then d(x) divides evenly into f(x). This means that, in this
case, both d(x) and q(x) are factors of f(x).
::::

:::: {#fs-id1165135638531 .note}
::: title
:::

How To

*Given a polynomial and a binomial, use long division to divide the
polynomial by the binomial.*

Set up the division problem.

Determine the first term of the quotient by dividing the leading term of
the dividend by the leading term of the divisor.

Multiply the answer by the divisor and write it below the like terms of
the dividend.

Subtract the bottom

binomial

from the top binomial.

Bring down the next term of the dividend.

Repeat steps 2--5 until reaching the last term of the dividend.

If the remainder is non-zero, express as a fraction using the divisor as
the denominator.
::::

::: {#Example_03_05_01 .example}
Divide 5 x 2 +3x−2 by x+1.

The quotient is 5x−2. The remainder is 0. We write the result as

$$\frac{5x^{2} + 3x - 2}{x + 1} = 5x - 2$$

or

$$5x^{2} + 3x - 2 = \left( {x + 1} \right)\left( {5x - 2} \right)$$

This division problem had a remainder of 0. This tells us that the
dividend is divided evenly by the divisor, and that the divisor is a
factor of the dividend.
:::

::: {#Example_03_05_02 .example}
Divide 6 x 3 +11 x 2 −31x+15 by 3x−2.

There is a remainder of 1. We can express the result as:

$$\frac{6x^{3} + 11x^{2} - 31x + 15}{3x - 2} = 2x^{2} + 5x - 7 + \frac{1}{3x - 2}$$

We can check our work by using the Division Algorithm to rewrite the
solution. Then multiply.

$$(3x - 2)(2x^{2} + 5x - 7) + 1 = 6x^{3} + 11x^{2} - 31x + 15$$

Notice, as we write our result,

the dividend is

6

x

3

\+

11

x

2

−

31

x

\+

15

the divisor is

3

x

−

2

the quotient is

2

x

2

\+

5

x

−

7

the remainder is

1
:::

:::: {#fs-id1165134042317 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Divide 16 x 3 −12 x 2 +20x−3 by 4x+5.

4 x 2 −8x+15− 78 4x+5
::::

# Using Synthetic Division to Divide Polynomials {#fs-id1165137932621}

As we've seen, long division of polynomials can involve many steps and
be quite cumbersome. *Synthetic division* is a shorthand method of
dividing polynomials for the special case of dividing by a linear factor
whose leading coefficient is 1.

To illustrate the process, recall the example at the beginning of the
section.

Divide 2 x 3 −3 x 2 +4x+5 by x+2 using the long division algorithm.

The final form of the process looked like this:

There is a lot of repetition in the table. If we don't write the
variables but, instead, line up their coefficients in columns under the
division sign and also eliminate the partial products, we already have a
simpler version of the entire problem.

Synthetic division carries this simplification even a few more steps.
Collapse the table by moving each of the rows up to fill any vacant
spots. Also, instead of dividing by 2, as we would in division of whole
numbers, then multiplying and subtracting the middle product, we change
the sign of the "divisor" to --2, multiply and add. The process starts
by bringing down the leading coefficient.

We then multiply it by the "divisor" and add, repeating this process
column by column, until there are no entries left. The bottom row
represents the coefficients of the quotient; the last entry of the
bottom row is the remainder. In this case, the quotient is 2 x 2 --7x+18
and the remainder is --31. The process will be made more clear in
[\#](#).

:::: {#fs-id1165135383640 .note}
::: title
Synthetic Division
:::

Synthetic division is a shortcut that can be used when the divisor is a
binomial in the form x−k where k is a real number. In synthetic
division, only the coefficients are used in the division process.
::::

:::: {#fs-id1165135393407 .note}
::: title
:::

How To

*Given two polynomials, use synthetic division to divide.*

Write

k

for the divisor.

Write the coefficients of the dividend.

Bring the lead coefficient down.

Multiply the lead coefficient by

k

.

Write the product in the next column.

Add the terms of the second column.

Multiply the result by

k

.

Write the product in the next column.

Repeat steps 5 and 6 for the remaining columns.

Use the bottom numbers to write the quotient. The number in the last
column is the remainder. The next number from the right has degree 0,
the next number has degree 1, and so on.
::::

::: {#Example_03_05_03 .example}
Use synthetic division to divide 5 x 2 −3x−36 by x−3.

Begin by setting up the synthetic division. Write k and the
coefficients.

Bring down the lead coefficient. Multiply the lead coefficient by k.

Continue by adding the numbers in the second column. Multiply the
resulting number by k. Write the result in the next column. Then add the
numbers in the third column.

The result is 5x+12. The remainder is 0. So x−3 is a factor of the
original polynomial.

Just as with long division, we can check our work by multiplying the
quotient by the divisor and adding the remainder.

(x−3)(5x+12)+0=5 x 2 −3x−36
:::

::: {#Example_03_05_04 .example}
Use synthetic division to divide 4 x 3 +10 x 2 −6x−20 by x+2.

The binomial divisor is x+2 so k=−2. Add each column, multiply the
result by --2, and repeat until the last column is reached.

The result is 4 x 2 +2x−10. The remainder is 0. Thus, x+2 is a factor of
4 x 3 +10 x 2 −6x−20.

The graph of the polynomial function f(x)=4 x 3 +10 x 2 −6x−20 in
[\#](#) shows a zero at x=k=−2. This confirms that x+2 is a factor of 4
x 3 +10 x 2 −6x−20.

<figure id="Figure_03_05_009">

</figure>
:::

::: {#Example_03_05_05 .example}
Use synthetic division to divide −9 x 4 +10 x 3 +7 x 2 −6 by x−1.

Notice there is no *x*-term. We will use a zero as the coefficient for
that term.

The result is −9 x 3 + x 2 +8x+8+ 2 x−1 .
:::

:::: {#fs-id1165134037571 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Use synthetic division to divide 3 x 4 +18 x 3 −3x+40 by x+7.

3 x 3 −3 x 2 +21x−150+ 1,090 x+7
::::

# Using Polynomial Division to Solve Application Problems {#fs-id1165135403412}

Polynomial division can be used to solve a variety of application
problems involving expressions for area and volume. We looked at an
application at the beginning of this section. Now we will solve that
problem in the following example.

::: {#Example_03_05_06 .example}
The volume of a rectangular solid is given by the polynomial 3 x 4 −3 x
3 −33 x 2 +54x. The length of the solid is given by 3x and the width is
given by x−2. Find the height, h, of the solid.

There are a few ways to approach this problem. We need to divide the
expression for the volume of the solid by the expressions for the length
and width. Let us create a sketch as in [\#](#).

<figure id="Figure_03_05_010">

</figure>

We can now write an equation by substituting the known values into the
formula for the volume of a rectangular solid.

$$\begin{array}{rcl}
V & = & {l \cdot w \cdot h} \\
{3x^{4} - 3x^{3} - 33x^{2} + 54x} & = & {3x \cdot (x - 2) \cdot h}
\end{array}$$

To solve for h, first divide both sides by 3x.

$$\begin{array}{rcl}
\frac{3x \cdot (x - 2) \cdot h}{3x} & = & \frac{3x^{4} - 3x^{3} - 33x^{2} + 54x}{3x} \\
{(x - 2)h} & = & {x^{3} - x^{2} - 11x + 18}
\end{array}$$

Now solve for h using synthetic division.

$$h = \frac{x^{3} - x^{2} - 11x + 18}{x - 2}$$

The quotient is x 2 +x−9 and the remainder is 0. The height of the solid
is x 2 +x−9.
:::

:::: {#fs-id1165135694534 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

The area of a rectangle is given by 3 x 3 +14 x 2 −23x+6. The width of
the rectangle is given by x+6. Find an expression for the length of the
rectangle.

3 x 2 −4x+1
::::

:::: {#fs-id1165135571867 .note}
::: title
:::

Media

Access these online resources for additional instruction and practice
with polynomial division.

Dividing a Trinomial by a Binomial Using Long Division

Dividing a Polynomial by a Binomial Using Long Division

Ex 2: Dividing a Polynomial by a Binomial Using Synthetic Division

Ex 4: Dividing a Polynomial by a Binomial Using Synthetic Division
::::

# Key Equations {#fs-id1165135487276}

  --------------------
  Division Algorithm
  --------------------

# Key Concepts {#fs-id1165135531548}

Polynomial long division can be used to divide a polynomial by any
polynomial with equal or lower degree. See

and

.

The Division Algorithm tells us that a polynomial dividend can be
written as the product of the divisor and the quotient added to the
remainder.

Synthetic division is a shortcut that can be used to divide a polynomial
by a binomial in the form

x

−

k

.

See

,

,

and

.

Polynomial division can be used to solve application problems, including
area and volume. See

.

# Section Exercises {#fs-id1165135255120}

## Verbal {#fs-id1165135255124}

If division of a polynomial by a binomial results in a remainder of
zero, what can be conclude?

The binomial is a factor of the polynomial.

If a polynomial of degree n is divided by a binomial of degree 1, what
is the degree of the quotient?

## Algebraic {#fs-id1165135443995}

For the following exercises, use long division to divide. Specify the
quotient and the remainder.

( x 2 +5x−1 )÷( x−1 )

x+6+ 5 x-1 ,quotient:x+6,remainder:5

( 2 x 2 −9x−5 )÷( x−5 )

( 3 x 2 +23x+14 )÷( x+7 )

3x+2,quotient: 3x+2,remainder: 0

( 4 x 2 −10x+6 )÷( 4x+2 )

( 6 x 2 −25x−25 )÷( 6x+5 )

x−5,quotient:x−5,remainder:0

( − x 2 −1 )÷( x+1 )

( 2 x 2 −3x+2 )÷( x+2 )

2x−7+ 16 x+2 ,quotient:​2x−7,remainder:16

( x 3 −126 )÷( x−5 )

( 3 x 2 −5x+4 )÷( 3x+1 )

x−2+ 6 3x+1 ,quotient:x−2,remainder:6

( x 3 −3 x 2 +5x−6 )÷( x−2 )

( 2 x 3 +3 x 2 −4x+15 )÷( x+3 )

2 x 2 −3x+5,quotient:2 x 2 −3x+5,remainder:0

For the following exercises, use synthetic division to find the
quotient. Ensure the equation is in the form required by synthetic
division. (Hint: divide the dividend and divisor by the coefficient of
the linear term in the divisor.)

( 3 x 3 +2 x 2 −x+4 )÷( x−3 )

( 2 x 3 −6 x 2 −7x+6 )÷(x−4)

2 x 2 +2x+1+ 10 x−4

( 6 x 3 −10 x 2 −7x−15 )÷(x+1)

( 4 x 3 −12 x 2 −5x−1 )÷(2x+1)

2 x 2 −7x+1− 2 2x+1

( 9 x 3 −9 x 2 +18x+5 )÷(3x−1)

( 3 x 3 −2 x 2 +x−4 )÷( x+3 )

3 x 2 −11x+34− 106 x+3

( −6 x 3 + x 2 −4 )÷( 2x−3 )

( 2 x 3 +7 x 2 −13x−3 )÷( 2x−3 )

x 2 +5x+1

( 3 x 3 −5 x 2 +2x+3 )÷(x+2)

( 4 x 3 −5 x 2 +13 )÷(x+4)

4 x 2 −21x+84− 323 x+4

( x 3 −3x+2 )÷( x+2 )

( x 3 −21 x 2 +147x−343 )÷( x−7 )

x 2 −14x+49

( x 3 −15 x 2 +75x−125 )÷( x−5 )

( 9 x 3 −x+2 )÷( 3x−1 )

3 x 2 +x+ 2 3x−1

( 6 x 3 − x 2 +5x+2 )÷( 3x+1 )

( x 4 + x 3 −3 x 2 −2x+1 )÷( x+1 )

x 3 −3x+1

( x 4 −3 x 2 +1 )÷( x−1 )

( x 4 +2 x 3 −3 x 2 +2x+6 )÷( x+3 )

x 3 − x 2 +2

( x 4 −10 x 3 +37 x 2 −60x+36 )÷( x−2 )

( x 4 −8 x 3 +24 x 2 −32x+16 )÷( x−2 )

x 3 −6 x 2 +12x−8

( x 4 +5 x 3 −3 x 2 −13x+10 )÷( x+5 )

( x 4 −12 x 3 +54 x 2 −108x+81 )÷( x−3 )

x 3 −9 x 2 +27x−27

( 4 x 4 −2 x 3 −4x+2 )÷( 2x−1 )

( 4 x 4 +2 x 3 −4 x 2 +2x+2 )÷( 2x+1 )

2 x 3 −2x+2

For the following exercises, use synthetic division to determine whether
the first expression is a factor of the second. If it is, indicate the
factorization.

x−2,4 x 3 −3 x 2 −8x+4

x−2,3 x 4 −6 x 3 −5x+10

Yes ( x−2 )(3 x 3 −5)

x+3,−4 x 3 +5 x 2 +8

x−2,4 x 4 −15 x 2 −4

Yes ( x−2 )(4 x 3 +8 x 2 +x+2)

x− 1 2 ,2 x 4 − x 3 +2x−1

x+ 1 3 ,3 x 4 + x 3 −3x+1

No

## Graphical {#fs-id1165135481299}

For the following exercises, use the graph of the third-degree
polynomial and one factor to write the factored form of the polynomial
suggested by the graph. The leading coefficient is one.

Factor is x 2 −x+3

Factor is ( x 2 +2x+4)

(x−1)( x 2 +2x+4)

Factor is x 2 +2x+5

Factor is x 2 +x+1

(x−5)( x 2 +x+1)

Factor is x 2 +2x+2

For the following exercises, use synthetic division to find the quotient
and remainder.

4 x 3 −33 x−2

Quotient:4 x 2 +8x+16,remainder:−1

2 x 3 +25 x+3

3 x 3 +2x−5 x−1

Quotient:3 x 2 +3x+5,remainder:0

−4 x 3 − x 2 −12 x+4

x 4 −22 x+2

Quotient: x 3 −2 x 2 +4x−8,remainder:−6

## Technology {#fs-id1165135501101}

For the following exercises, use a calculator with CAS to answer the
questions.

Consider x k −1 x−1 with k=1, 2, 3. What do you expect the result to be
if k=4?

Consider x k +1 x+1 for k=1, 3, 5. What do you expect the result to be
if k=7?

x 6 − x 5 + x 4 − x 3 + x 2 −x+1

Consider x 4 − k 4 x−k for k=1, 2, 3. What do you expect the result to
be if k=4?

Consider x k x+1 with k=1, 2, 3. What do you expect the result to be if
k=4?

x 3 − x 2 +x−1+ 1 x+1

Consider x k x−1 with k=1, 2, 3. What do you expect the result to be if
k=4?

## Extensions {#fs-id1165135191971}

For the following exercises, use synthetic division to determine the
quotient involving a complex number.

x+1 x−i

1+ 1+i x−i

x 2 +1 x−i

x+1 x+i

1+ 1−i x+i

x 2 +1 x+i

x 3 +1 x−i

x 2 +ix−1+ 1−i x−i

## Real-World Applications {#fs-id1165135180069}

For the following exercises, use the given length and area of a
rectangle to express the width algebraically.

Length is x+5, area is 2 x 2 +9x−5.

Length is 2x+5, area is 4 x 3 +10 x 2 +6x+15

2 x 2 +3

Length is 3x--4, area is 6 x 4 −8 x 3 +9 x 2 −9x−4

For the following exercises, use the given volume of a box and its
length and width to express the height of the box algebraically.

Volume is 12 x 3 +20 x 2 −21x−36, length is 2x+3, width is 3x−4.

2x+3

Volume is 18 x 3 −21 x 2 −40x+48, length is 3x--4, width is 3x--4.

Volume is 10 x 3 +27 x 2 +2x−24, length is 5x--4, width is 2x+3.

x+2

Volume is 10 x 3 +30 x 2 −8x−24, length is 2, width is x+3.

For the following exercises, use the given volume and radius of a
cylinder to express the height of the cylinder algebraically.

Volume is π(25 x 3 −65 x 2 −29x−3), radius is 5x+1.

x−3

Volume is π(4 x 3 +12 x 2 −15x−50), radius is 2x+5.

Volume is π(3 x 4 +24 x 3 +46 x 2 −16x−32), radius is x+4.

3 x 2 −2

# 

Division Algorithm

given a polynomial dividend

f

(

x

)

and a non-zero polynomial divisor

d

(

x

)

where the degree of

d

(

x

)

is less than or equal to the degree of

f

(

x

)

, there exist unique polynomials

q

(

x

)

and

r

(

x

)

such that

f

(

x

)

=

d

(

x

)

q

(

x

)

\+

r

(

x

)

where

q

(

x

)

is the quotient and

r

(

x

)

is the remainder. The remainder is either equal to zero or has degree
strictly less than

d

(

x

)

.

synthetic division

a shortcut method that can be used to divide a polynomial by a binomial
of the form

x

−

k

[^1]: National Park Service. \"Lincoln Memorial Building Statistics.\"
    http://www.nps.gov/linc/historyculture/lincoln-memorial-building-statistics.htm.
    Accessed 4/3/2014
