m51279

> In this section, you will:
>
> Use arrow notation.
>
> Solve applied problems involving rational functions.
>
> Find the domains of rational functions.
>
> Identify vertical asymptotes.
>
> Identify horizontal asymptotes.
>
> Graph rational functions.

28d4cfda-bec3-48cf-9695-2cc71939e22a

#  {#eip-189}

## Learning Objectives {#eip-617}

Determine the values for which a rational expression is undefined (IA
7.1.1)

Find x- and y-intercepts (IA 3.1.4)

## Objective 1: Determine the values for which a rational expression is undefined (IA 7.1.1) {#eip-870}

:::: {#eip-861 .note}
::: title
Rational Expression
:::

A rational expression is an expression of the form pq, where *p* and *q*
are polynomials and q≠0.
::::

Here are some examples of rational expressions:

$$\begin{matrix}
{- \frac{24}{56}} & & & {\mspace{54mu}\frac{5x}{12y}} & & & {\mspace{54mu}\frac{4x + 1}{x^{2} - 9}} & & & {\mspace{54mu}\frac{4x^{2} + 3x - 1}{2x - 8}}
\end{matrix}$$

### Practice Makes Perfect {#eip-413}

Evaluate the following expression for the given values 5x-10x+3

x=3

x=2

x=-3

Why do we have a problem with evaluating this expression for x=−3 but
not for x=2 ?

We say that this rational expression is undefined because its
denominator equals 0.

:::: {#eip-426 .note}
::: title
:::

*Determine the values for which a rational expression is undefined.*

Set the denominator equal to zero.

Solve the equation.
::::

::: {#eip-689 .example}
Determine the value for which the rational expression x+32x2+9x-5 is
undefined

  ----------------------------------- ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Set the denominator equal to zero   2x2+9x-5=0
  Solve the equation                  We will solve this quadratic equation by factoring (2x-1)(x+5)=0 2x-1=0x+5=02x=1x=−5x=12
  Answer:                             Rational expression is undefined when x=12 and x=--5
  ----------------------------------- ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
:::

### Practice Makes Perfect {#eip-372}

Determine the value for which each rational expression is undefined.

3y25x

3x+52x-3

m-5m2+m-6

2aa2-9

Determine the value for which the function f(x)=3x-2 is undefined.

What is the connection between the value you found and the graph of this
function?

Because function is not defined at x=2 , we say that the Domain of this
function is -∞, 22, ∞

*The domain of a rational function includes all real numbers except
those that cause the denominator to equal zero.*

Determine the domain of the function and express using interval
notation.

ⓐ

f

(

x

)

=

x

3

x

\-

1

ⓑ

f

(

x

)

=

3

x

2

\-

5

x

\+

6

## Objective 2: Find x - and y -intercepts (IA 3.1.4) {#eip-610}

:::: {#eip-285 .note}
::: title
Vocabulary
:::

The x-intercept is a point where the graph intersects the
\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ axis. The y-coordinate at this point is always
\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_.

The y-intercept is a point where the graph intersects the
\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ axis. The x-coordinate at this point is always
\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_.
::::

:::: {#eip-892 .note}
::: title
:::

*Find the x-intercept and y-intercept of a line.*

Example: 3x−4y=9

Find the x -intercept and y -intercept of a line.

  ------------------------------------------------------------- ----------------------------------------- --------------
  To find the *x -intercept*, replace y with zero and find x    *x -int:* 3x−4(0)=9 , 3x=9 , x=3          *(3, 0)*
  To find the *y -intercept*, replace x with zero and find y    *y -int:* 3(0)--4y=9 , --4y=9 , y=--94    *(0, --94 )*
  ------------------------------------------------------------- ----------------------------------------- --------------

<figure id="eip-idm1125287936">

</figure>
::::

### Practice Makes Perfect {#eip-29}

Find x - and y -intercept of each of the following functions. Express
each as an ordered pair.

3x-2y=6 

y=5x-1

y=1(x-2)+3

Suppose we know that the cost of making a product is dependent on the
number of items, x, produced. This is given by the equation
C(x)=15,000x−0.1 x 2 +1000. If we want to know the average cost for
producing x items, we would divide the cost function by the number of
items, x.

The average cost function, which yields the average cost per item for x
items produced, is

$$f(x) = \frac{15,000x - 0.1x^{2} + 1000}{x}$$

Many other application problems require finding an average value in a
similar way, giving us variables in the denominator. Written without a
variable in the denominator, this function will contain a negative
integer power.

In the last few sections, we have worked with polynomial functions,
which are functions with non-negative integers for exponents. In this
section, we explore rational functions, which have variables in the
denominator.

# Using Arrow Notation {#fs-id1165135397235}

We have seen the graphs of the basic reciprocal function and the squared
reciprocal function from our study of toolkit functions. Examine these
graphs, as shown in [\#](#), and notice some of their features.

<figure id="Figure_03_07_001">

</figure>

Several things are apparent if we examine the graph of f(x)= 1 x .

On the left branch of the graph, the curve approaches the

x

-axis

(

y

=

0

)

as

x

→

--

∞

.

As the graph approaches

x

=

0

from the left, the curve drops, but as we approach zero from the right,
the curve rises.

Finally, on the right branch of the graph, the curves approaches the

x-

axis

(

y

=

0

)

as

x

→

∞

.

To summarize, we use arrow notation to show that x or f(x) is
approaching a particular value. See [\#](#).

  Symbol    Meaning
  --------- ------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  x→ a −    x approaches a from the left ( x\<a but close to a )
  x→ a +    x approaches a from the right ( x\>a but close to a )
  x→∞       x approaches infinity ( x increases without bound)
  x→−∞      x approaches negative infinity ( x decreases without bound)
  f(x)→∞    the output approaches infinity (the output increases without bound)
  f(x)→−∞   the output approaches negative infinity (the output decreases without bound)
  f(x)→a    the output approaches a

## Local Behavior of f(x)= 1 x {#fs-id1165137759950}

Let's begin by looking at the reciprocal function, f(x)= 1 x . We cannot
divide by zero, which means the function is undefined at x=0; so zero is
not in the domain*.* As the input values approach zero from the left
side (becoming very small, negative values), the function values
decrease without bound (in other words, they approach negative
infinity). We can see this behavior in [\#](#).

  --------------- ------- -------- --------- ----------
  *x*             --0.1   --0.01   --0.001   --0.0001
  *f(x)= 1 x*     --10    --100    --1000    --10,000
  --------------- ------- -------- --------- ----------

We write in arrow notation

$$\text{as~}x\rightarrow 0^{-},f(x)\rightarrow - \infty$$

As the input values approach zero from the right side (becoming very
small, positive values), the function values increase without bound
(approaching infinity). We can see this behavior in [\#](#).

  --------------- ----- ------ ------- --------
  *x*             0.1   0.01   0.001   0.0001
  *f(x)= 1 x*     10    100    1000    10,000
  --------------- ----- ------ ------- --------

We write in arrow notation

$$\text{As~}x\rightarrow 0^{+},~f(x)\rightarrow\infty.$$

See [\#](#).

<figure id="Figure_03_07_002">

</figure>

This behavior creates a *vertical asymptote*, which is a vertical line
that the graph approaches but never crosses. In this case, the graph is
approaching the vertical line x=0 as the input becomes close to zero.
See [\#](#).

<figure id="Figure_03_07_003">

</figure>

:::: {#fs-id1165137732344 .note}
::: title
Vertical Asymptote
:::

A vertical asymptote of a graph is a vertical line x=a where the graph
tends toward positive or negative infinity as the input approaches a
from either the left or the right. We write

$$\text{As~}x\rightarrow a^{–},f(x)\rightarrow \pm \infty\text{~or~}x\rightarrow a^{+},f(x)\rightarrow \pm \infty.$$
::::

## End Behavior of f(x)= 1 x {#fs-id1165137502160}

As the values of x approach infinity, the function values approach 0. As
the values of x approach negative infinity, the function values approach
0. See [\#](#). Symbolically, using arrow notation

As x→∞,f(x)→0,and as x→−∞,f(x)→0.

<figure id="Figure_03_07_004">

</figure>

Based on this overall behavior and the graph, we can see that the
function approaches 0 but never actually reaches 0; it seems to level
off as the inputs become large. This behavior creates a *horizontal
asymptote*, a horizontal line that the graph approaches as the input
increases or decreases without bound. In this case, the graph is
approaching the horizontal line y=0. See [\#](#)*.*

<figure id="Figure_03_07_005">

</figure>

:::: {#fs-id1165137901226 .note}
::: title
Horizontal Asymptote
:::

A horizontal asymptote of a graph is a horizontal line y=b where the
graph approaches the line as the inputs increase or decrease without
bound. We write

$$\text{As~}x\rightarrow\infty\mspace{9mu}\text{or~}x\rightarrow - \infty,\mspace{9mu} f(x)\rightarrow b.$$
::::

::: {#Example_03_07_01 .example}
Use arrow notation to describe the end behavior and local behavior of
the function graphed in [\#](#).

<figure id="Figure_03_07_006">

</figure>

Notice that the graph is showing a vertical asymptote at x=2, which
tells us that the function is undefined at x=2.

$$\text{As~}x\rightarrow 2^{-},f(x)\rightarrow - \infty,\mspace{9mu}\text{and~as~}x\rightarrow 2^{+},\mspace{9mu} f(x)\rightarrow\infty.$$

And as the inputs decrease without bound, the graph appears to be
leveling off at output values of 4, indicating a horizontal asymptote at
y=4. As the inputs increase without bound, the graph levels off at 4.

$$\text{As~}x\rightarrow\infty,\mspace{9mu} f(x)\rightarrow 4\mspace{9mu}\text{and~as~}x\rightarrow - \infty,\mspace{9mu} f(x)\rightarrow 4.$$
:::

:::: {#fs-id1165137597363 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Use arrow notation to describe the end behavior and local behavior for
the reciprocal squared function.

End behavior: as x→±∞, f(x)→0; Local behavior: as x→0, f(x)→∞ (there are
no *x*- or *y*-intercepts)
::::

::: {#Example_03_07_02 .example}
Sketch a graph of the reciprocal function shifted two units to the left
and up three units. Identify the horizontal and vertical asymptotes of
the graph, if any.

Shifting the graph left 2 and up 3 would result in the function

$$f(x) = \frac{1}{x + 2} + 3$$

or equivalently, by giving the terms a common denominator,

$$f(x) = \frac{3x + 7}{x + 2}$$

The graph of the shifted function is displayed in [\#](#).

<figure id="Figure_03_07_007">

</figure>

Notice that this function is undefined at x=−2, and the graph also is
showing a vertical asymptote at x=−2.

$$\text{As~}x\rightarrow - 2^{-},~f(x)\rightarrow - \infty,\text{and~as}~x\rightarrow - 2^{+},~f(x)\rightarrow\infty.$$

As the inputs increase and decrease without bound, the graph appears to
be leveling off at output values of 3, indicating a horizontal asymptote
at y=3.

$$\text{As~}x\rightarrow \pm \infty,~f(x)\rightarrow 3.$$

Notice that horizontal and vertical asymptotes are shifted left 2 and up
3 along with the function.
:::

:::: {#fs-id1165137434563 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Sketch the graph, and find the horizontal and vertical asymptotes of the
reciprocal squared function that has been shifted right 3 units and down
4 units.

The function and the asymptotes are shifted 3 units right and 4 units
down. As x→3,f(x)→∞, and as x→±∞,f(x)→−4.

The function is f(x)= 1 (x−3) 2 −4.
::::

# Solving Applied Problems Involving Rational Functions {#fs-id1165137534932}

In [\#](#), we shifted a toolkit function in a way that resulted in the
function f(x)= 3x+7 x+2 . This is an example of a rational function. A
*rational function* is a function that can be written as the quotient of
two polynomial functions. Many real-world problems require us to find
the ratio of two polynomial functions. Problems involving rates and
concentrations often involve rational functions.

:::: {#fs-id1165137386884 .note}
::: title
Rational Function
:::

A rational function is a function that can be written as the quotient of
two polynomial functions P(x) and Q(x).

$$f(x) = \frac{P(x)}{Q(x)} = \frac{a_{p}x^{p} + a_{p - 1}x^{p - 1} + ... + a_{1}x + a_{0}}{b_{q}x^{q} + b_{q - 1}x^{q - 1} + ... + b_{1}x + b_{0}},Q(x) \neq 0$$
::::

::: {#Example_03_07_03 .example}
After running out of pre-packaged supplies, a nurse in a refugee camp is
preparing an intravenous sugar solution for patients in the camp
hospital. A large mixing tank currently contains 100 gallons of
distilled water into which 5 pounds of sugar have been mixed. A tap will
open pouring 10 gallons per minute of distilled water into the tank at
the same time sugar is poured into the tank at a rate of 1 pound per
minute. Find the ratio of sugar to water, in pounds per gallon in the
tank after 12 minutes. Is that a greater ratio of sugar to water, in
pounds per gallon than at the beginning?

Let t be the number of minutes since the tap opened. Since the water
increases at 10 gallons per minute, and the sugar increases at 1 pound
per minute, these are constant rates of change. This tells us the amount
of water in the tank is changing linearly, as is the amount of sugar in
the tank. We can write an equation independently for each:

$$\begin{array}{rcl}
{\text{water:~}W(t)} & = & {100 + 10t\mspace{9mu}\text{in~gallons}} \\
{\text{sugar:~}S(t)} & = & {5 + 1t\mspace{9mu}\text{in~pounds}}
\end{array}$$

The ratio of sugar to water, in pounds per gallon, C , will be the ratio
of pounds of sugar to gallons of water

$$C(t) = \frac{5 + t}{100 + 10t}$$

The ratio of sugar to water, in pounds per gallon after 12 minutes is
given by evaluating C( t ) at t=12.

$$\begin{array}{ccl}
{C(12)} & = & \frac{5 + 12}{100 + 10(12)} \\
 & = & \frac{17}{220}
\end{array}$$

This means the ratio of sugar to water, in pounds per gallon is 17
pounds of sugar to 220 gallons of water.

At the beginning, the ratio of sugar to water, in pounds per gallon is

$$\begin{array}{ccl}
{C(0)} & = & \frac{5 + 0}{100 + 10(0)} \\
 & = & \frac{1}{20}
\end{array}$$

Since 17 220 ≈0.08\> 1 20 =0.05, the ratio of sugar to water, in pounds
per gallon is greater after 12 minutes than at the beginning.
:::

:::: {#fs-id1165135194535 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

There are 1,200 first-year and 1,500 second-year students at a rally at
noon. After 12 p.m., 20 first-year students arrive at the rally every
five minutes while 15 second-year students leave the rally. Find the
ratio of first-year to second-year students at 1 p.m.

12 11
::::

# Finding the Domains of Rational Functions {#fs-id1165135309829}

A vertical asymptote represents a value at which a rational function is
undefined, so that value is not in the domain of the function. A
reciprocal function cannot have values in its domain that cause the
denominator to equal zero. In general, to find the domain of a rational
function, we need to determine which inputs would cause division by
zero.

:::: {#fs-id1165134282216 .note}
::: title
Domain of a Rational Function
:::

The domain of a rational function includes all real numbers except those
that cause the denominator to equal zero.
::::

:::: {#fs-id1165135530461 .note}
::: title
:::

How To

*Given a rational function, find the domain.*

Set the denominator equal to zero.

Solve to find the

x

-values that cause the denominator to equal zero.

The domain is all real numbers except those found in Step 2.
::::

::: {#Example_03_07_04 .example}
Find the domain of f(x)= x+3 x 2 −9 .

Begin by setting the denominator equal to zero and solving.

$$\begin{array}{rcl}
{x^{2} - 9} & = & 0 \\
x^{2} & = & 9 \\
x & = & \pm 3
\end{array}$$

The denominator is equal to zero when x=±3. The domain of the function
is all real numbers except x=±3.

A graph of this function, as shown in [\#](#), confirms that the
function is not defined when x=±3.

<figure id="Figure_03_07_009">

</figure>

There is a vertical asymptote at x=3 and a hole in the graph at x=−3. We
will discuss these types of holes in greater detail later in this
section.
:::

:::: {#fs-id1165134192966 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Find the domain of f(x)= 4x 5(x−1)(x−5) .

The domain is all real numbers except x=1 and x=5.
::::

# Identifying Vertical Asymptotes of Rational Functions {#fs-id1165137836721}

By looking at the graph of a rational function, we can investigate its
local behavior and easily see whether there are asymptotes. We may even
be able to approximate their location. Even without the graph, however,
we can still determine whether a given rational function has any
asymptotes, and calculate their location.

## Vertical Asymptotes {#fs-id1165135194731}

The vertical asymptotes of a rational function may be found by examining
the factors of the denominator that are not common to the factors in the
numerator. Vertical asymptotes occur at the zeros of such factors.

:::: {#fs-id1165133097252 .note}
::: title
:::

How To

*Given a rational function, identify any vertical asymptotes of its
graph.*

Factor the numerator and denominator.

Note any restrictions in the domain of the function.

Reduce the expression by canceling common factors in the numerator and
the denominator.

Note any values that cause the denominator to be zero in this simplified
version. These are where the vertical asymptotes occur.

Note any restrictions in the domain where asymptotes do not occur. These
are removable discontinuities, or "holes."
::::

::: {#Example_03_07_05 .example}
Find the vertical asymptotes of the graph of k(x)= 5+2 x 2 2−x− x 2 .

First, factor the numerator and denominator.

$$\begin{array}{ccl}
{k(x)} & = & \frac{5 + 2x^{2}}{2 - x - x^{2}} \\
 & = & \frac{5 + 2x^{2}}{(2 + x)(1 - x)}
\end{array}$$

To find the vertical asymptotes, we determine where this function will
be undefined by setting the denominator equal to zero:

$$\begin{array}{rcl}
{(2 + x)(1 - x)} & = & 0 \\
x & = & {-2,1}
\end{array}$$

Neither x=--2 nor x=1 are zeros of the numerator, so the two values
indicate two vertical asymptotes. The graph in [\#](#) confirms the
location of the two vertical asymptotes.

<figure id="Figure_03_07_010">

</figure>
:::

## Removable Discontinuities {#fs-id1165137640086}

Occasionally, a graph will contain a hole: a single point where the
graph is not defined, indicated by an open circle. We call such a hole a
removable discontinuity.

For example, the function f(x)= x 2 −1 x 2 −2x−3 may be re-written by
factoring the numerator and the denominator.

$$f(x) = \frac{\left( {x + 1} \right)\left( {x - 1} \right)}{\left( {x + 1} \right)\left( {x - 3} \right)}$$

Notice that x+1 is a common factor to the numerator and the denominator.
The zero of this factor, x=−1, is the location of the removable
discontinuity. Notice also that x--3 is not a factor in both the
numerator and denominator. The zero of this factor, x=3, is the vertical
asymptote. See [\#](#). \[Note that removable discontinuities may not be
visible when we use a graphing calculator, depending upon the window
selected.\]

<figure id="Figure_03_07_011">

</figure>

:::: {#fs-id1165137891255 .note}
::: title
Removable Discontinuities of Rational Functions
:::

A removable discontinuity occurs in the graph of a rational function at
x=a if a is a zero for a factor in the denominator that is common with a
factor in the numerator. We factor the numerator and denominator and
check for common factors. If we find any, we set the common factor equal
to 0 and solve. This is the location of the removable discontinuity.
This is true if the multiplicity of this factor is greater than or equal
to that in the denominator. If the multiplicity of this factor is
greater in the denominator, then there is still an asymptote at that
value.
::::

::: {#Example_03_07_06 .example}
Find the vertical asymptotes and removable discontinuities of the graph
of k(x)= x−2 x 2 −4 .

Factor the numerator and the denominator.

$$k(x) = \frac{x - 2}{(x - 2)(x + 2)}$$

Notice that there is a common factor in the numerator and the
denominator, x--2. The zero for this factor is x=2. This is the location
of the removable discontinuity.

Notice that there is a factor in the denominator that is not in the
numerator, x+2. The zero for this factor is x=−2. The vertical asymptote
is x=−2. See [\#](#).

<figure id="Figure_03_07_012">

</figure>

The graph of this function will have the vertical asymptote at x=−2, but
at x=2 the graph will have a hole.
:::

:::: {#fs-id1165137660004 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Find the vertical asymptotes and removable discontinuities of the graph
of f(x)= x 2 −25 x 3 −6 x 2 +5x .

Removable discontinuity at x=5. Vertical asymptotes: x=0,x=1.
::::

# Identifying Horizontal Asymptotes of Rational Functions {#fs-id1165134222349}

While vertical asymptotes describe the behavior of a graph as the
*output* gets very large or very small, horizontal asymptotes help
describe the behavior of a graph as the *input* gets very large or very
small. Recall that a polynomial's end behavior will mirror that of the
leading term. Likewise, a rational function's end behavior will mirror
that of the ratio of the function that is the ratio of the leading
terms.

There are three distinct outcomes when checking for horizontal
asymptotes:

*Case 1:* If the degree of the denominator \> degree of the numerator,
there is a horizontal asymptote at y=0.

$$\text{Example:~}f(x) = \frac{4x + 2}{x^{2} + 4x - 5}$$

In this case, the end behavior is f(x)≈ 4x x 2 = 4 x . This tells us
that, as the inputs increase or decrease without bound, this function
will behave similarly to the function g(x)= 4 x , and the outputs will
approach zero, resulting in a horizontal asymptote at y=0. See [\#](#).
Note that this graph crosses the horizontal asymptote.

<figure id="Figure_03_07_013">

</figure>

*Case 2:* If the degree of the denominator \< degree of the numerator by
one, we get a slant asymptote.

$$\text{Example:~}f(x) = \frac{3x^{2} - 2x + 1}{x - 1}$$

In this case, the end behavior is f(x)≈ 3 x 2 x =3x. This tells us that
as the inputs increase or decrease without bound, this function will
behave similarly to the function g(x)=3x. As the inputs grow large, the
outputs will grow and not level off, so this graph has no horizontal
asymptote. However, the graph of g(x)=3x looks like a diagonal line, and
since f will behave similarly to g, it will approach a line close to
y=3x. This line is a slant asymptote.

To find the equation of the slant asymptote, divide 3 x 2 −2x+1 x−1 .
The quotient is 3x+1, and the remainder is 2. The slant asymptote is the
graph of the line g(x)=3x+1. See [\#](#).

<figure id="Figure_03_07_014">

</figure>

*Case 3:* If the degree of the denominator = degree of the numerator,
there is a horizontal asymptote at y= a n b n , where a n and b n are
the leading coefficients of p( x ) and q( x ) for f(x)= p(x) q(x)
,q(x)≠0.

$$\text{Example:~}f(x) = \frac{3x^{2} + 2}{x^{2} + 4x - 5}$$

In this case, the end behavior is f(x)≈ 3 x 2 x 2 =3. This tells us that
as the inputs grow large, this function will behave like the function
g(x)=3, which is a horizontal line. As x→±∞,f(x)→3, resulting in a
horizontal asymptote at y=3. See [\#](#). Note that this graph crosses
the horizontal asymptote.

<figure id="Figure_03_07_015">

</figure>

Notice that, while the graph of a rational function will never cross a
vertical asymptote, the graph may or may not cross a horizontal or slant
asymptote. Also, although the graph of a rational function may have many
vertical asymptotes, the graph will have at most one horizontal (or
slant) asymptote.

It should be noted that, if the degree of the numerator is larger than
the degree of the denominator by more than one, the end behavior of the
graph will mimic the behavior of the reduced end behavior fraction. For
instance, if we had the function

$$f(x) = \frac{3x^{5} - x^{2}}{x + 3}$$

with end behavior

$$f(x) \approx \frac{3x^{5}}{x} = 3x^{4},$$

the end behavior of the graph would look similar to that of an even
polynomial with a positive leading coefficient.

$$x\rightarrow \pm \infty,~f(x)\rightarrow\infty$$

:::: {#fs-id1165137659475 .note}
::: title
Horizontal Asymptotes of Rational Functions
:::

The horizontal asymptote of a rational function can be determined by
looking at the degrees of the numerator and denominator.

Degree of numerator

is less than

degree of denominator: horizontal asymptote at

y

=

0\.

Degree of numerator

is greater than degree of denominator by one

: no horizontal asymptote; slant asymptote.

Degree of numerator

is equal to

degree of denominator: horizontal asymptote at ratio of leading
coefficients.
::::

::: {#Example_03_07_07 .example}
For the functions listed, identify the horizontal or slant asymptote.

ⓐ

g

(

x

)

=

6

x

3

−

10

x

2

x

3

\+

5

x

2

ⓑ

h

(

x

)

=

x

2

−

4

x

\+

1

x

\+

2

ⓒ

k

(

x

)

=

x

2

\+

4

x

x

3

−

8

For these solutions, we will use f(x)= p(x) q(x) , q(x)≠0.

ⓐ

g

(

x

)

=

6

x

3

−

10

x

2

x

3

\+

5

x

2

:

The degree of

p

=

degree of

q

=

3

,

so we can find the horizontal asymptote by taking the ratio of the
leading terms. There is a horizontal asymptote at

y

=

6

2

or

y

=

3\.

ⓑ

h

(

x

)

=

x

2

−

4

x

\+

1

x

\+

2

:

The degree of

p

=

2

and degree of

q

=

1\.

Since

p

\>

q

by 1, there is a slant asymptote found at

x

2

−

4

x

\+

1

x

\+

2

.

The quotient is x--6 and the remainder is 13. There is a slant asymptote
at y=x--6.

ⓒ

k

(

x

)

=

x

2

\+

4

x

x

3

−

8

:

The degree of

p

=

2

\<

degree of

q

=

3

,

so there is a horizontal asymptote

y

=

0\.
:::

::: {#Example_03_07_08 .example}
In the sugar concentration problem earlier, we created the equation
C(t)= 5+t 100+10t .

Find the horizontal asymptote and interpret it in context of the
problem.

Both the numerator and denominator are linear (degree 1). Because the
degrees are equal, there will be a horizontal asymptote at the ratio of
the leading coefficients. In the numerator, the leading term is t, with
coefficient 1. In the denominator, the leading term is 10t, with
coefficient 10. The horizontal asymptote will be at the ratio of these
values:

$$t\rightarrow\infty,~C(t)\rightarrow\frac{1}{10}$$

This function will have a horizontal asymptote at y= 1 10 .

This tells us that as the values of *t* increase, the values of C will
approach 1 10 . In context, this means that, as more time goes by, the
concentration of sugar in the tank will approach one-tenth of a pound of
sugar per gallon of water or 1 10 pounds per gallon.
:::

::: {#Example_03_07_09 .example}
Find the horizontal and vertical asymptotes of the function

$$f(x) = \frac{(x - 2)(x + 3)}{(x - 1)(x + 2)(x - 5)}$$

First, note that this function has no common factors, so there are no
potential removable discontinuities.

The function will have vertical asymptotes when the denominator is zero,
causing the function to be undefined. The denominator will be zero at
x=1,--2,and 5, indicating vertical asymptotes at these values.

The numerator has degree 2, while the denominator has degree 3. Since
the degree of the denominator is greater than the degree of the
numerator, the denominator will grow faster than the numerator, causing
the outputs to tend towards zero as the inputs get large, and so as
x→±∞, f(x)→0. This function will have a horizontal asymptote at y=0. See
[\#](#).

<figure id="Figure_03_07_016">

</figure>
:::

:::: {#fs-id1165137782334 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Find the vertical and horizontal asymptotes of the function:

f(x)= (2x−1)(2x+1) (x−2)(x+3)

Vertical asymptotes at x=2 and x=--3; horizontal asymptote at y=4.
::::

:::: {#fs-id1165134259298 .note}
::: title
Intercepts of Rational Functions
:::

A rational function will have a *y*-intercept at f(0) , if the function
is defined at zero. A rational function will not have a *y*-intercept if
the function is not defined at zero.

Likewise, a rational function will have *x*-intercepts at the inputs
that cause the output to be zero. Since a fraction is only equal to zero
when the numerator is zero, *x*-intercepts can only occur when the
numerator of the rational function is equal to zero.
::::

::: {#Example_03_07_10 .example}
Find the intercepts of f(x)= (x−2)(x+3) (x−1)(x+2)(x−5) .

We can find the *y*-intercept by evaluating the function at zero

$$\begin{array}{ccl}
{f(0)} & = & \frac{(0 - 2)(0 + 3)}{(0 - 1)(0 + 2)(0 - 5)} \\
 & = & \frac{- 6}{10} \\
 & = & {- \frac{3}{5}} \\
 & = & -0.6
\end{array}$$

The *x*-intercepts will occur when the function is equal to zero:

$$\begin{array}{rclc}
0 & = & \frac{(x - 2)(x + 3)}{(x - 1)(x + 2)(x - 5)} & {\qquad\text{This~is~zero~when~the~numerator~is~zero}.} \\
0 & = & {(x - 2)(x + 3)} & \\
x & = & {2,-3} & 
\end{array}$$

The *y*-intercept is (0,--0.6), the *x*-intercepts are (2,0) and
(--3,0). See [\#](#).

<figure id="Figure_03_07_017">

</figure>
:::

:::: {#fs-id1165137447991 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Given the reciprocal squared function that is shifted right 3 units and
down 4 units, write this as a rational function. Then, find the *x*- and
*y*-intercepts and the horizontal and vertical asymptotes.

For the transformed reciprocal squared function, we find the rational
form. f(x)= 1 (x−3) 2 −4= 1−4 (x−3) 2 (x−3) 2 = 1−4( x 2 −6x+9)
(x−3)(x−3) = −4 x 2 +24x−35 x 2 −6x+9

Because the numerator is the same degree as the denominator we know that
as x→±∞, f(x)→−4; so y=--4 is the horizontal asymptote. Next, we set the
denominator equal to zero, and find that the vertical asymptote is x=3,
because as x→3,f(x)→∞. We then set the numerator equal to 0 and find the
*x*-intercepts are at (2.5,0) and (3.5,0). Finally, we evaluate the
function at 0 and find the *y*-intercept to be at ( 0, −35 9 ).
::::

# Graphing Rational Functions {#fs-id1165137461340}

In [\#](#), we see that the numerator of a rational function reveals the
*x*-intercepts of the graph, whereas the denominator reveals the
vertical asymptotes of the graph. As with polynomials, factors of the
numerator may have integer powers greater than one. Fortunately, the
effect on the shape of the graph at those intercepts is the same as we
saw with polynomials.

The vertical asymptotes associated with the factors of the denominator
will mirror one of the two toolkit reciprocal functions. When the degree
of the factor in the denominator is odd, the distinguishing
characteristic is that on one side of the vertical asymptote the graph
heads towards positive infinity, and on the other side the graph heads
towards negative infinity. See [\#](#).

<figure id="Figure_03_07_019">

</figure>

When the degree of the factor in the denominator is even, the
distinguishing characteristic is that the graph either heads toward
positive infinity on both sides of the vertical asymptote or heads
toward negative infinity on both sides. See [\#](#).

<figure id="Figure_03_07_018">

</figure>

For example, the graph of f(x)= (x+1) 2 (x−3) (x+3) 2 (x−2) is shown in
[\#](#).

<figure id="Figure_03_07_020">

</figure>

At the

x

-intercept

x

=

−1

corresponding to the

(

x

\+

1

)

2

factor of the numerator, the graph \"bounces\", consistent with the
quadratic nature of the factor.

At the

x

-intercept

x

=

3

corresponding to the

(

x

−

3

)

factor of the numerator, the graph passes through the axis as we would
expect from a linear factor.

At the vertical asymptote

x

=

−3

corresponding to the

(

x

\+

3

)

2

factor of the denominator, the graph heads towards positive infinity on
both sides of the asymptote, consistent with the behavior of the
function

f

(

x

)

=

1

x

2

.

At the vertical asymptote

x

=

2

,

corresponding to the

(

x

−

2

)

factor of the denominator, the graph heads towards positive infinity on
the left side of the asymptote and towards negative infinity on the
right side.

:::: {#fs-id1165135192767 .note}
::: title
:::

How To

*Given a rational function, sketch a graph.*

Evaluate the function at 0 to find the

y

-intercept.

Factor the numerator and denominator.

For factors in the numerator not common to the denominator, determine
where each factor of the numerator is zero to find the

x

-intercepts.

Find the multiplicities of the

x

-intercepts to determine the behavior of the graph at those points.

For factors in the denominator, note the multiplicities of the zeros to
determine the local behavior. For those factors not common to the
numerator, find the vertical asymptotes by setting those factors equal
to zero and then solve.

For factors in the denominator common to factors in the numerator, find
the removable discontinuities by setting those factors equal to 0 and
then solve.

Compare the degrees of the numerator and the denominator to determine
the horizontal or slant asymptotes.

Sketch the graph.
::::

::: {#Example_03_07_11 .example}
Sketch a graph of f(x)= (x+2)(x−3) (x+1) 2 (x−2) .

We can start by noting that the function is already factored, saving us
a step.

Next, we will find the intercepts. Evaluating the function at zero gives
the *y*-intercept:

$$\begin{array}{ccl}
{f(0)} & = & \frac{(0 + 2)(0 - 3)}{{(0 + 1)}^{2}(0 - 2)} \\
 & = & 3
\end{array}$$

To find the *x*-intercepts, we determine when the numerator of the
function is zero. Setting each factor equal to zero, we find
*x*-intercepts at x=--2 and x=3. At each, the behavior will be linear
(multiplicity 1), with the graph passing through the intercept.

We have a *y*-intercept at (0,3) and *x*-intercepts at (--2,0) and
(3,0).

To find the vertical asymptotes, we determine when the denominator is
equal to zero. This occurs when x+1=0 and when x--2=0, giving us
vertical asymptotes at x=--1 and x=2.

There are no common factors in the numerator and denominator. This means
there are no removable discontinuities.

Finally, the degree of denominator is larger than the degree of the
numerator, telling us this graph has a horizontal asymptote at y=0.

To sketch the graph, we might start by plotting the three intercepts.
Since the graph has no *x*-intercepts between the vertical asymptotes,
and the *y*-intercept is positive, we know the function must remain
positive between the asymptotes, letting us fill in the middle portion
of the graph as shown in [\#](#).

<figure id="Figure_03_07_021">

</figure>

The factor associated with the vertical asymptote at x=−1 was squared,
so we know the behavior will be the same on both sides of the asymptote.
The graph heads toward positive infinity as the inputs approach the
asymptote on the right, so the graph will head toward positive infinity
on the left as well.

For the vertical asymptote at x=2, the factor was not squared, so the
graph will have opposite behavior on either side of the asymptote. See
[\#](#). After passing through the *x*-intercepts, the graph will then
level off toward an output of zero, as indicated by the horizontal
asymptote.

<figure id="Figure_03_07_022">

</figure>
:::

:::: {#fs-id1165137603685 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Given the function f(x)= (x+2) 2 (x−2) 2 (x−1) 2 (x−3) , use the
characteristics of polynomials and rational functions to describe its
behavior and sketch the function.

Horizontal asymptote at y= 1 2 . Vertical asymptotes at x=1 and x=3.
*y*-intercept at ( 0, 4 3 . )

*x*-intercepts at (2,0) and (--2,0). (--2,0) is a zero with multiplicity
2, and the graph bounces off the *x*-axis at this point. (2,0) is a
single zero and the graph crosses the axis at this point.
::::

# Writing Rational Functions {#fs-id1165137481147}

Now that we have analyzed the equations for rational functions and how
they relate to a graph of the function, we can use information given by
a graph to write the function. A rational function written in factored
form will have an *x*-intercept where each factor of the numerator is
equal to zero. (An exception occurs in the case of a removable
discontinuity.) As a result, we can form a numerator of a function whose
graph will pass through a set of *x*-intercepts by introducing a
corresponding set of factors. Likewise, because the function will have a
vertical asymptote where each factor of the denominator is equal to
zero, we can form a denominator that will produce the vertical
asymptotes by introducing a corresponding set of factors.

:::: {#fs-id1165137661074 .note}
::: title
Writing Rational Functions from Intercepts and Asymptotes
:::

If a rational function has *x*-intercepts at x= x 1 , x 2 ,\..., x n ,
vertical asymptotes at x= v 1 , v 2 ,..., v m , and no x i =any  v j ,
then the function can be written in the form:

$$f(x) = a\frac{{(x - x_{1})}^{p_{1}}{(x - x_{2})}^{p_{2}}\cdots{(x - x_{n})}^{p_{n}}}{{(x - v_{1})}^{q_{1}}{(x - v_{2})}^{q_{2}}\cdots{(x - v_{m})}^{q_{n}}}$$

where the powers p i or q i on each factor can be determined by the
behavior of the graph at the corresponding intercept or asymptote, and
the stretch factor a can be determined given a value of the function
other than the *x*-intercept or by the horizontal asymptote if it is
nonzero.
::::

:::: {#fs-id1165137423517 .note}
::: title
:::

How To

*Given a graph of a rational function, write the function.*

Determine the factors of the numerator. Examine the behavior of the
graph at the

x

-intercepts to determine the zeroes and their multiplicities. (This is
easy to do when finding the "simplest" function with small
multiplicities---such as 1 or 3---but may be difficult for larger
multiplicities---such as 5 or 7, for example.)

Determine the factors of the denominator. Examine the behavior on both
sides of each vertical asymptote to determine the factors and their
powers.

Use any clear point on the graph to find the stretch factor.
::::

::: {#Example_03_07_12 .example}
Write an equation for the rational function shown in [\#](#).

<figure id="Figure_03_07_024">

</figure>

The graph appears to have *x*-intercepts at x=--2 and x=3. At both, the
graph passes through the intercept, suggesting linear factors. The graph
has two vertical asymptotes. The one at x=--1 seems to exhibit the basic
behavior similar to 1 x , with the graph heading toward positive
infinity on one side and heading toward negative infinity on the other.
The asymptote at x=2 is exhibiting a behavior similar to 1 x 2 , with
the graph heading toward negative infinity on both sides of the
asymptote. See [\#](#).

<figure id="Figure_03_07_025">

</figure>

We can use this information to write a function of the form

$$f(x) = a\frac{(x + 2)(x - 3)}{(x + 1){(x - 2)}^{2}}$$

To find the stretch factor, we can use another clear point on the graph,
such as the *y*-intercept (0,--2).

$$\begin{array}{rcl}
-2 & = & {a\frac{(0 + 2)(0 - 3)}{(0 + 1){(0 - 2)}^{2}}} \\
-2 & = & {a\frac{- 6}{4}} \\
a & = & {\frac{- 8}{- 6} = \frac{4}{3}}
\end{array}$$

This gives us a final function of f(x)= 4(x+2)(x−3) 3(x+1) (x−2) 2 .
:::

:::: {#fs-id1165135152264 .note}
::: title
:::

Media

Access these online resources for additional instruction and practice
with rational functions.

Graphing Rational Functions

Find the Equation of a Rational Function

Determining Vertical and Horizontal Asymptotes

Find the Intercepts, Asymptotes, and Hole of a Rational Function
::::

# Key Equations {#fs-id1165137659195}

  -------------------
  Rational Function
  -------------------

# Key Concepts {#fs-id1165137793507}

We can use arrow notation to describe local behavior and end behavior of
the toolkit functions

f

(

x

)

=

1

x

and

f

(

x

)

=

1

x

2

.

See

.

A function that levels off at a horizontal value has a horizontal
asymptote. A function can have more than one vertical asymptote. See

.

Application problems involving rates and concentrations often involve
rational functions. See

.

The domain of a rational function includes all real numbers except those
that cause the denominator to equal zero. See

.

The vertical asymptotes of a rational function will occur where the
denominator of the function is equal to zero and the numerator is not
zero. See

.

A removable discontinuity might occur in the graph of a rational
function if an input causes both numerator and denominator to be zero.
See

.

A rational function's end behavior will mirror that of the ratio of the
leading terms of the numerator and denominator functions. See

,

,

, and

.

Graph rational functions by finding the intercepts, behavior at the
intercepts and asymptotes, and end behavior. See

.

If a rational function has

x

-intercepts at

x

=

x

1

,

x

2

,

...

,

x

n

,

vertical asymptotes at

x

=

v

1

,

v

2

,

...

,

v

m

,

and no

x

i

=

any 

v

j

,

then the function can be written in the form

$$\begin{array}{l}
\begin{array}{l}
 \\
{f(x) = a\frac{{(x - x_{1})}^{p_{1}}{(x - x_{2})}^{p_{2}}\cdots{(x - x_{n})}^{p_{n}}}{{(x - v_{1})}^{q_{1}}{(x - v_{2})}^{q_{2}}\cdots{(x - v_{m})}^{q_{n}}}}
\end{array}
\end{array}$$

See [\#](#).

# Section Exercises {#fs-id1165137438214}

## Verbal {#fs-id1165137438217}

What is the fundamental difference in the algebraic representation of a
polynomial function and a rational function?

The rational function will be represented by a quotient of polynomial
functions.

What is the fundamental difference in the graphs of polynomial functions
and rational functions?

If the graph of a rational function has a removable discontinuity, what
must be true of the functional rule?

The numerator and denominator must have a common factor.

Can a graph of a rational function have no vertical asymptote? If so,
how?

Can a graph of a rational function have no *x*-intercepts? If so, how?

Yes. The numerator of the formula of the functions would have only
complex roots and/or factors common to both the numerator and
denominator.

## Algebraic {#fs-id1165135484143}

For the following exercises, find the domain of the rational functions.

f(x)= x−1 x+2

f(x)= x+1 x 2 −1

All reals x≠--1, 1

f(x)= x 2 +4 x 2 −2x−8

f(x)= x 2 +4x−3 x 4 −5 x 2 +4

All reals x≠--1, --2, 1, 2

For the following exercises, find the domain, vertical asymptotes, and
horizontal asymptotes of the functions.

f(x)= 4 x−1

f( x )= 2 5x+2

V.A. at x=-- 2 5 ; H.A. at y=0; Domain is all reals x≠-- 2 5

f(x)= x x 2 −9

f(x)= x x 2 +5x−36

V.A. at x=4, --9; H.A. at y=0; Domain is all reals x≠4, --9

f( x )= 3+x x 3 −27

f(x)= 3x−4 x 3 −16x

V.A. at x=0, 4, −4; H.A. at y=0; Domain is all reals x≠0,4, --4

f(x)= x 2 −1 x 3 +9 x 2 +14x

f(x)= x+5 x 2 −25

V.A. at x=5; H.A. at y=0; Domain is all reals x≠5,−5

f(x)= x−4 x−6

f( x )= 4−2x 3x−1

V.A. at x= 1 3 ; H.A. at y=− 2 3 ; Domain is all reals x≠ 1 3 .

For the following exercises, find the *x*- and *y*-intercepts for the
functions.

f(x)= x+5 x 2 +4

f(x)= x x 2 −x

none

f(x)= x 2 +8x+7 x 2 +11x+30

f(x)= x 2 +x+6 x 2 −10x+24

x-intercepts none, y-intercept ( 0, 1 4 )

f(x)= 94−2 x 2 3 x 2 −12

For the following exercises, describe the local and end behavior of the
functions.

f( x )= x 2x+1

Local behavior: x→− 1 2 + ,f(x)→−∞,x→− 1 2 − ,f(x)→∞

End behavior: x→±∞,f(x)→ 1 2

f( x )= 2x x−6

f( x )= −2x x−6

Local behavior: x→ 6 + ,f(x)→−∞,x→ 6 − ,f(x)→∞, End behavior:
x→±∞,f(x)→−2

f( x )= x 2 −4x+3 x 2 −4x−5

f( x )= 2 x 2 −32 6 x 2 +13x−5

Local behavior: x→ 1 3 + ,f(x)→−∞,x→ 1 3 − , f(x)→∞,x→ - 5 2 +
,f(x)→∞,x→ - 5 2 -- ,f(x)→−∞

End behavior: x→±∞,f(x)→ 1 3

For the following exercises, find the slant asymptote of the functions.

f(x)= 24 x 2 +6x 2x+1

f(x)= 4 x 2 −10 2x−4

y=2x+4

f(x)= 81 x 2 −18 3x−2

f(x)= 6 x 3 −5x 3 x 2 +4

y=2x

f(x)= x 2 +5x+4 x−1

## Graphical {#fs-id1165134190712}

For the following exercises, use the given transformation to graph the
function. Note the vertical and horizontal asymptotes.

The reciprocal function shifted up two units.

V.A.x=0,H.A.y=2

The reciprocal function shifted down one unit and left three units.

The reciprocal squared function shifted to the right 2 units.

V.A.x=2,H.A.y=0

The reciprocal squared function shifted down 2 units and right 1 unit.

For the following exercises, find the horizontal intercepts, the
vertical intercept, the vertical asymptotes, and the horizontal or slant
asymptote of the functions. Use that information to sketch a graph.

p( x )= 2x−3 x+4

V.A.x=−4,H.A.y=2;( 3 2 ,0 );( 0,− 3 4 )

q( x )= x−5 3x−1

s( x )= 4 ( x−2 ) 2

V.A.x=2,H.A.y=0,(0,1)

r( x )= 5 ( x+1 ) 2

f( x )= 3 x 2 −14x−5 3 x 2 +8x−16

V.A.x=−4,x= 4 3 ,H.A.y=1;(5,0);( − 1 3 ,0 );( 0, 5 16 )

g( x )= 2 x 2 +7x−15 3 x 2 −14x+15

a( x )= x 2 +2x−3 x 2 −1

V.A.x=−1,H.A.y=1;( −3,0 );( 0,3 )

b( x )= x 2 −x−6 x 2 −4

h( x )= 2 x 2 + x−1 x−4

V.A.x=4,S.A.y=2x+9;( −1,0 );( 1 2 ,0 );( 0, 1 4 )

k( x )= 2 x 2 −3x−20 x−5

w( x )= ( x−1 )( x+3 )( x−5 ) ( x+2 ) 2 (x−4)

V.A.x=−2,x=4,H.A.y=1,( 1,0 );( 5,0 );( −3,0 );( 0,− 15 16 )

z( x )= ( x+2 ) 2 ( x−5 ) ( x−3 )( x+1 )( x+4 )

For the following exercises, write an equation for a rational function
with the given characteristics.

Vertical asymptotes at x=5 and x=−5, *x*-intercepts at (2,0) and (−1,0),
*y*-intercept at ( 0,4 )

y=50 x 2 −x−2 x 2 −25

Vertical asymptotes at x=−4 and x=−1, *x-*intercepts at ( 1,0 ) and (
5,0 ), *y-*intercept at (0,7)

Vertical asymptotes at x=−4 and x=−5, *x*-intercepts at ( 4,0 ) and (
−6,0 ), Horizontal asymptote at y=7

y=7 x 2 +2x−24 x 2 +9x+20

Vertical asymptotes at x=−3 and x=6, *x*-intercepts at ( −2,0 ) and (
1,0 ), Horizontal asymptote at y=−2

Vertical asymptote at x=−1, Double zero at x=2, *y*-intercept at (0,2)

y= 1 2 x 2 −4x+4 x+1

Vertical asymptote at x=3, Double zero at x=1, *y*-intercept at (0,4)

For the following exercises, use the graphs to write an equation for the
function.

y=4 x−3 x 2 −x−12

y= 27(x−2) (x+3) (x--3)2

y= 1 3 x 2 +x−6 x−1

y=−6 (x−1) 2 (x+3) (x−2) 2

Use 0,-12 as the additional point.

## Numeric {#fs-id1165137896276}

For the following exercises, make tables to show the behavior of the
function near the vertical asymptote and reflecting the horizontal
asymptote

f(x)= 1 x−2

  --- ------ ------- -------- ------- ---------
  x   2.01   2.001   2.0001   1.99    1.999
  y   100    1,000   10,000   --100   --1,000
  --- ------ ------- -------- ------- ---------

  --- ------ ------- ------- -------- ---------
  x   10     100     1,000   10,000   100,000
  y   .125   .0102   .001    .0001    .00001
  --- ------ ------- ------- -------- ---------

Vertical asymptote x=2, Horizontal asymptote y=0

f(x)= x x−3

f(x)= 2x x+4

  --- ------- -------- --------- -------- ---------
  x   --4.1   --4.01   --4.001   --3.99   --3.999
  y   82      802      8,002     --798    --7998
  --- ------- -------- --------- -------- ---------

  --- -------- -------- ------- -------- ----------
  x   10       100      1,000   10,000   100,000
  y   1.4286   1.9331   1.992   1.9992   1.999992
  --- -------- -------- ------- -------- ----------

Vertical asymptote x=−4, Horizontal asymptote y=2

f(x)= 2x (x−3) 2

f(x)= x 2 x 2 +2x+1

  --- ------ ------- --------- ------- --------
  x   --.9   --.99   --.999    --1.1   --1.01
  y   81     9,801   998,001   121     10,201
  --- ------ ------- --------- ------- --------

  --- -------- ------- ------- -------- ---------
  x   10       100     1,000   10,000   100,000
  y   .82645   .9803   .998    .9998    
  --- -------- ------- ------- -------- ---------

Vertical asymptote x=−1, Horizontal asymptote y=1

## Technology {#fs-id1165137722149}

For the following exercises, use a calculator to graph f( x ). Use the
graph to solve f( x )\>0.

f(x)= 2 x+1

f(x)= 4 2x−3

( 3 2 ,∞ )

f(x)= 2 ( x−1 )( x+2 )

f(x)= x+2 ( x−1 )( x−4 )

(−2,1)∪(4,∞)

f(x)= (x+3) 2 ( x−1 ) 2 ( x+1 )

## Extensions {#fs-id1165137597399}

For the following exercises, identify the removable discontinuity.

f(x)= x 2 −4 x−2

( 2,4 )

f(x)= x 3 +1 x+1

f(x)= x 2 +x−6 x−2

( 2,5 )

f(x)= 2 x 2 +5x−3 x+3

f(x)= x 3 + x 2 x+1

( --1,1 )

## Real-World Applications {#fs-id1165137757845}

For the following exercises, express a rational function that describes
the situation.

In the refugee camp hospital, a large mixing tank currently contains 200
gallons of water, into which 10 pounds of sugar have been mixed. A tap
will open, pouring 10 gallons of water per minute into the tank at the
same time sugar is poured into the tank at a rate of 3 pounds per
minute. Find the concentration (pounds per gallon) of sugar in the tank
after t minutes.

In the refugee camp hospital, a large mixing tank currently contains 300
gallons of water, into which 8 pounds of sugar have been mixed. A tap
will open, pouring 20 gallons of water per minute into the tank at the
same time sugar is poured into the tank at a rate of 2 pounds per
minute. Find the concentration (pounds per gallon) of sugar in the tank
after t minutes.

C(t)= 8+2t 300+20t

For the following exercises, use the given rational function to answer
the question.

The concentration C of a drug in a patient's bloodstream t hours after
injection is given by C(t)= 2t 3+ t 2 . What happens to the
concentration of the drug as t increases?

The concentration C of a drug in a patient's bloodstream t hours after
injection is given by C(t)= 100t 2 t 2 +75 . Use a calculator to
approximate the time when the concentration is highest.

After about 6.12 hours.

For the following exercises, construct a rational function that will
help solve the problem. Then, use a calculator to answer the question.

An open box with a square base is to have a volume of 108 cubic inches.
Find the dimensions of the box that will have minimum surface area. Let
x = length of the side of the base.

A rectangular box with a square base is to have a volume of 20 cubic
feet. The material for the base costs 30 cents/ square foot. The
material for the sides costs 10 cents/square foot. The material for the
top costs 20 cents/square foot. Determine the dimensions that will yield
minimum cost. Let x = length of the side of the base.

A(x)=50 x 2 + 800 x . 2 by 2 by 5 feet.

A right circular cylinder has volume of 100 cubic inches. Find the
radius and height that will yield minimum surface area. Let x = radius.

A right circular cylinder with no top has a volume of 50 cubic meters.
Find the radius that will yield minimum surface area. Let x = radius.

A(x)=π x 2 + 100 x . Radius = 2.52 meters.

A right circular cylinder is to have a volume of 40 cubic inches. It
costs 4 cents/square inch to construct the top and bottom and 1
cent/square inch to construct the rest of the cylinder. Find the radius
to yield minimum cost. Let x = radius.

# 

arrow notation

a way to represent symbolically the local and end behavior of a function
by using arrows to indicate that an input or output approaches a value

horizontal asymptote

a horizontal line

y

=

b

where the graph approaches the line as the inputs increase or decrease
without bound.

rational function

a function that can be written as the ratio of two polynomials

removable discontinuity

a single point at which a function is undefined that, if filled in,
would make the function continuous; it appears as a hole on the graph of
a function

vertical asymptote

a vertical line

x

=

a

where the graph tends toward positive or negative infinity as the inputs
approach

a
