m51280

> In this section, you will:
>
> Find the inverse of an invertible polynomial function.
>
> Restrict the domain to find the inverse of a polynomial function.

ce233d35-8468-4ded-97dc-b34c3475a26a

#  {#eip-133}

## Learning Objectives {#eip-462}

Given function, find the inverse function (IA 10.1.3)

Find the domain of a radical function (IA 8.7.2)

## Objective 1: Given function, find the inverse function (IA 10.1.3). {#eip-926}

:::: {#eip-401 .note}
::: title
Vocabulary.
:::

A *function* is a relation where for every \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ there is
exactly one \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_. In order to check if relation is a
*function* we can use \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ *test*. *Domain* of the relation
is the set of all \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_. *Range* of the relation is the set
of all \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_.
::::

### Inverse of a Function {#eip-idm259609984}

Let's look at a one-to one function, f , represented by the ordered
pairs {(0,5),(1,6),(2,7),(3,8)}. For each x -value, f adds 5 to get the
y -value. To 'undo' the addition of 5, we subtract 5 from each y -value
and get back to the original x -value. We can call this "taking the
inverse of f " and name the function f−1.

Notice that that the ordered pairs of f and f−1 have their x -values and
y -values reversed. The domain of f is the range of f−1 and the domain
of f−1 is the range of f.

*Note*: Do not confuse f-1 with 1f(x) . The negative 1 in f-1 is not an
exponent but a notation used to designate the inverse function.

*To produce an inverse relation or function, interchange the first and
the second coordinates of each ordered pair, or interchange the
variables in an equation.*

::: {#eip-343 .example}
Given function, find the inverse function.

Find the inverse of the function 0,3,1,5,2,8,3,4. Determine the domain
and range of the inverse function.

To find the inverse we interchange the x-values and y-value in the
ordered pairs of the function.

  ---------------------------- ---------------------------
  Inverse function             {(3,0),(5,1),(8,2),(4,3)}
  Domain of Inverse Function   {3,5,8,4})
  Range of Inverse Function    {0,1,2,3}
  ---------------------------- ---------------------------
:::

### Practice Makes Perfect {#eip-664}

Given function, find the inverse function.

Find the inverse of the function {(6,1),(2,5),(3,11),(0,4)}. Determine
the domain and range of the inverse function

If a point (a,b) is on the graph of a function f(x) , then the ordered
pair (b,a) is on the graph of f-1(x) .

Since every point on the graph of a function f(x) is a mirror image of a
point on the graph of f-1(x) , we say the graphs are mirror images of
each other through the line y=x . We can use this concept to graph the
inverse of a function.

<figure id="eip-idm393660432">

</figure>

Graph, on the same coordinate system, the inverse of the function shown
below.

<figure id="eip-idm393660433">

</figure>

:::: {#eip-292 .note}
::: title
:::

Find the inverse of a One-to-One Function when its given as an equation

Substitute y in place of f(x).

Interchange the variables x and y.

Solve for y.

Rewrite y as

f

\-

1

(

x

)

.

Verify that the functions are inverses.
::::

::: {#eip-896 .example}
Given function, find the inverse function

Find the inverse of f(x)=4x+7.
:::

### Practice Makes Perfect {#eip-77}

Find the inverse of each of the following functions using the 4 step
procedure outlined above.

f(x)=3x-13

f(x)=5x-2

f(x)=x3+4

## Objective 2: Find the domain of a radical function (IA 8.7.2). {#eip-689}

### A radical function is a function that is defined by a radical expression. {#eip-idm540884880}

For example, f(x)=x+3 , g(x)=2x-13 are both radical functions.

### Practice Makes Perfect {#eip-50}

For the radical function f(x)=x-2 , find the following

ⓐ

f

(

3

)

ⓑ

f

(

6

)

ⓒ

f

(

2

)

ⓓ

f

(

1

)

ⓔ

Why is there a problem with part d? Explain.

ⓕ

What do you think is the domain of

f

(

x

)

? (Hint: think of domain as all the x-values for which we can evaluate

f

(

x

)

For the radical function f(x)=x-23 , find the following

ⓐ

f

(

3

)

ⓑ

f

(

6

)

ⓒ

f

(

2

)

ⓓ

f

(

1

)

ⓔ

Why is there a problem with part d? Explain.

ⓕ

What do you think is the domain of

f

(

x

)

? (Hint: think of domain as all the x-values for which we can evaluate

f

(

x

)

:::: {#eip-232 .note}
::: title
Domain of a Radical Function
:::

When the *index* of the radical is *even*, the radicand must be greater
than or equal to zero.

When the *index* of the radical is *odd*, the radicand can be any real
number.
::::

::: {#eip-586 .example}
Find the domain of a radical function.

Find the domain of the function f(x)=3x-4 . Write the domain in interval
notation.

Since this function has a radical with the even index of 2, we set the
radicand to be greater than or equal to 0 and then solve to find the
domain.

3x-4≥03x≥4x≥43

The domain expressed in interval notation is \[43, ∞\]
:::

### Practice Makes Perfect {#eip-798}

Find the domain of the following functions and express using interval
notation.

f(x)=3x+5

f(x)=4-6x3

f(x)=5-x4

Park rangers and other trail managers may construct rock piles, stacks,
or other arrangements, usually called cairns, to mark trails or other
landmarks. (Rangers and environmental scientists discourage hikers from
doing the same, in order to avoid confusion and preserve the habitats of
plants and animals.) A cairn in the form of a mound of gravel is in the
shape of a cone with the height equal to twice the radius.

<figure id="Figure_03_08_001">

</figure>

The volume is found using a formula from elementary geometry.

$$\begin{array}{ccl}
V & = & {\frac{1}{3}\pi r^{2}h} \\
 & = & {\frac{1}{3}\pi r^{2}(2r)} \\
 & = & {\frac{2}{3}\pi r^{3}}
\end{array}$$

We have written the volume V in terms of the radius r. However, in some
cases, we may start out with the volume and want to find the radius. For
example: A customer purchases 100 cubic feet of gravel to construct a
cone shape mound with a height twice the radius. What are the radius and
height of the new cone? To answer this question, we use the formula

$$r = \sqrt[3]{\frac{3V}{2\pi}}$$

This function is the inverse of the formula for V in terms of r.

In this section, we will explore the inverses of polynomial and rational
functions and in particular the radical functions we encounter in the
process.

# Finding the Inverse of a Polynomial Function {#fs-id1165135500723}

Two functions f and g are inverse functions if for every coordinate pair
in f,(a,b), there exists a corresponding coordinate pair in the inverse
function, g,(b,a). In other words, the coordinate pairs of the inverse
functions have the input and output interchanged. Only one-to-one
functions have inverses. Recall that a one-to-one function has a unique
output value for each input value and passes the horizontal line test.

For example, suppose the Sustainability Club builds a water runoff
collector in the shape of a parabolic trough as shown in [\#](#). We can
use the information in the figure to find the surface area of the water
in the trough as a function of the depth of the water.

<figure id="Figure_03_08_002">

</figure>

Because it will be helpful to have an equation for the parabolic
cross-sectional shape, we will impose a coordinate system at the cross
section, with x measured horizontally and y measured vertically, with
the origin at the vertex of the parabola. See [\#](#).

<figure id="Figure_03_08_003">

</figure>

From this we find an equation for the parabolic shape. We placed the
origin at the vertex of the parabola, so we know the equation will have
form y(x)=a x 2 . Our equation will need to pass through the point (6,
18), from which we can solve for the stretch factor a.

$$\begin{array}{ccl}
18 & = & {a6^{2}} \\
a & = & \frac{18}{36} \\
 & = & \frac{1}{2}
\end{array}$$

Our parabolic cross section has the equation

$$y(x) = \frac{1}{2}x^{2}$$

We are interested in the surface area of the water, so we must determine
the width at the top of the water as a function of the water depth. For
any depth y, the width will be given by 2x, so we need to solve the
equation above for x and find the inverse function. However, notice that
the original function is not one-to-one, and indeed, given any output
there are two inputs that produce the same output, one positive and one
negative.

To find an inverse, we can restrict our original function to a limited
domain on which it *is* one-to-one. In this case, it makes sense to
restrict ourselves to positive x values. On this domain, we can find an
inverse by solving for the input variable:

$$\begin{array}{rcl}
y & = & {\frac{1}{2}x^{2}} \\
{2y} & = & x^{2} \\
x & = & {\pm \sqrt{2y}} \\
{\therefore y} & = & {\pm \sqrt{2x}}
\end{array}$$

This is not a function as written. Since we are limiting ourselves to
positive x values in the original function, we can eliminate the
negative solution, which gives us the inverse function we're looking
for.

$$y = \sqrt{2x}$$

Because x is the distance from the center of the parabola to either
side, the entire width of the water at the top will be 2x. The trough is
3 feet (36 inches) long, so the surface area will then be:

$$\begin{array}{ccl}
\text{Area} & = & {l \cdot w} \\
 & = & {36 \cdot 2x} \\
 & = & {72x} \\
 & = & {72\sqrt{2y}}
\end{array}$$

This example illustrates two important points:

When finding the inverse of a quadratic, we have to limit ourselves to a
domain on which the function is one-to-one.

The inverse of a quadratic function is a square root function. Both are
toolkit functions and different types of power functions.

Functions involving roots are often called radical functions. While it
is not possible to find an inverse of most polynomial functions, some
basic polynomials do have inverses. Such functions are called invertible
functions, and we use the notation f −1 (x).

Warning: f −1 (x) is not the same as the reciprocal of the function f( x
). This use of "--1" is reserved to denote inverse functions. To denote
the reciprocal of a function f( x ), we would need to write ( f( x ) )
−1 = 1 f( x ) .

An important relationship between inverse functions is that they "undo"
each other. If f −1 is the inverse of a function f, then f is the
inverse of the function f −1 . In other words, whatever the function f
does to x, f −1 undoes it---and vice-versa.

$$f^{- 1}\left( {f(x)} \right) = x,\mspace{9mu}\text{for~all~}x\mspace{9mu}\text{in~the~domain~of~}f$$

and

$$f\left( {f^{- 1}(x)} \right) = x,\mspace{9mu}\text{for~all~}x\mspace{9mu}\text{in~the~domain~of~}f^{- 1}$$

Note that the inverse switches the domain and range of the original
function.

:::: {#fs-id1165137735698 .note}
::: title
Verifying Two Functions Are Inverses of One Another
:::

Two functions, f and g, are inverses of one another if for all x in the
domain of f and g.

$$g\left( {f(x)} \right) = f\left( {g(x)} \right) = x$$
::::

:::: {#fs-id1165137646263 .note}
::: title
:::

How To

*Given a polynomial function, find the inverse of the function by
restricting the domain in such a way that the new function is
one-to-one.*

Replace

f

(

x

)

with

y

.

Interchange

x

and

y

.

Solve for

y

,

and rename the function

f

−

1

(

x

)

.
::::

::: {#Example_03_08_01 .example}
Show that f( x )= 1 x+1 and f −1 ( x )= 1 x −1 are inverses, for x≠0,−1
.

We must show that f −1 ( f( x ) )=x and f( f −1 ( x ) )=x.

$$\begin{matrix}
{f^{- 1}(f(x))} & = & {f^{- 1}\left( \frac{1}{x + 1} \right)} \\
 & = & {\frac{1}{\frac{1}{x + 1}} - 1} \\
 & = & {(x + 1) - 1} \\
 & = & x \\
{f(f^{-1}(x))} & = & {f\left( {\frac{1}{x} - 1} \right)} \\
 & = & \frac{1}{\left( {\frac{1}{x} - 1} \right) + 1} \\
 & = & \frac{1}{\frac{1}{x}} \\
 & = & x
\end{matrix}$$

Therefore, f( x )= 1 x+1 and f −1 ( x )= 1 x −1 are inverses.
:::

:::: {#fs-id1165137594492 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Show that f( x )= x+5 3 and f −1 ( x )=3x−5 are inverses.

f −1 ( f( x ) )= f −1 ( x+5 3 )=3( x+5 3 )−5=( x−5 )+5=x and f( f −1 ( x
) )=f( 3x−5 )= ( 3x−5 )+5 3 = 3x 3 =x
::::

::: {#Example_03_08_02 .example}
Find the inverse of the function f(x)=5 x 3 +1.

This is a transformation of the basic cubic toolkit function, and based
on our knowledge of that function, we know it is one-to-one. Solving for
the inverse by solving for x.

$$\begin{array}{rcl}
y & = & {5x^{3} + 1} \\
x & = & {5y^{3} + 1} \\
{x - 1} & = & {5y^{3}} \\
\frac{x - 1}{5} & = & y^{3} \\
{f^{- 1}(x)} & = & \sqrt[3]{\frac{x - 1}{5}}
\end{array}$$

Look at the graph of f and f --1 . Notice that one graph is the
reflection of the other about the line y=x. This is always the case when
graphing a function and its inverse function.

Also, since the method involved interchanging x and y, notice
corresponding points. If (a,b) is on the graph of f, then (b,a) is on
the graph of f --1 . Since (0,1) is on the graph of f, then (1,0) is on
the graph of f --1 . Similarly, since (1,6) is on the graph of f, then
(6,1) is on the graph of f --1 . See [\#](#).

<figure id="Figure_03_08_004">

</figure>
:::

:::: {#fs-id1165137583696 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Find the inverse function of f(x)= x+4 3 .

f −1 (x)= x 3 −4
::::

# Restricting the Domain to Find the Inverse of a Polynomial Function {#fs-id1165137847291}

So far, we have been able to find the inverse functions of cubic
functions without having to restrict their domains. However, as we know,
not all cubic polynomials are one-to-one. Some functions that are not
one-to-one may have their domain restricted so that they are one-to-one,
but only over that domain. The function over the restricted domain would
then have an inverse function. Since quadratic functions are not
one-to-one, we must restrict their domain in order to find their
inverses.

:::: {#fs-id1165137434585 .note}
::: title
Restricting the Domain
:::

If a function is not one-to-one, it cannot have an inverse. If we
restrict the domain of the function so that it becomes one-to-one, thus
creating a new function, this new function will have an inverse.
::::

:::: {#fs-id1165137431545 .note}
::: title
:::

How To

*Given a polynomial function, restrict the domain of a function that is
not one-to-one and then find the inverse.*

Restrict the domain by determining a domain on which the original
function is one-to-one.

Replace

f

(

x

)

with

y

.

Interchange

x

and

y

.

Solve for

y

,

and rename the function or pair of function

f

−1

(

x

)

.

Revise the formula for

f

−1

(

x

)

by ensuring that the outputs of the inverse function correspond to the
restricted domain of the original function.
::::

::: {#Example_03_08_03 .example}
Find the inverse function of f:

ⓐ

f

(

x

)

=

(

x

−

4

)

2

,

x

≥

4

ⓑ

f

(

x

)

=

(

x

−

4

)

2

,

x

≤

4

The original function f(x)= (x−4) 2 is not one-to-one, but the function
is restricted to a domain of x≥4 or x≤4 on which it is one-to-one. See
[\#](#).

<figure id="Figure_03_08_005">

</figure>

To find the inverse, start by replacing f(x) with the simple variable y.

$$\begin{array}{rclc}
y & = & {(x - 4)}^{2} & {\qquad\text{Interchange}\operatorname{}x\operatorname{}\text{and~}y.} \\
x & = & {(y - 4)}^{2} & {\qquad\text{Take~the~square~root}.} \\
{\pm \sqrt{x}} & = & {y - 4} & {\qquad\text{Add}~4~\text{to~both~sides}.} \\
{4 \pm \sqrt{x}} & = & y & 
\end{array}$$

This is not a function as written. We need to examine the restrictions
on the domain of the original function to determine the inverse. Since
we reversed the roles of x and y for the original f(x), we looked at the
domain: the values x could assume. When we reversed the roles of x and
y, this gave us the values y could assume. For this function, x≥4, so
for the inverse, we should have y≥4, which is what our inverse function
gives.

ⓐ

The domain of the original function was restricted to

x

≥

4

,

so the outputs of the inverse need to be the same,

f

(

x

)

≥

4

,

and we must use the + case:

$$f^{- 1}(x) = 4 + \sqrt{x}$$

ⓑ

The domain of the original function was restricted to

x

≤

4

,

so the outputs of the inverse need to be the same,

f

(

x

)

≤

4

,

and we must use the -- case:

$$f^{- 1}(x) = 4 - \sqrt{x}$$

On the graphs in [\#](#), we see the original function graphed on the
same set of axes as its inverse function. Notice that together the
graphs show symmetry about the line y=x. The coordinate pair (4, 0) is
on the graph of f and the coordinate pair (0, 4) is on the graph of f −1
. For any coordinate pair, if ( a,b ) is on the graph of f, then ( b,a )
is on the graph of f −1 . Finally, observe that the graph of f
intersects the graph of f −1 on the line y=x. Points of intersection for
the graphs of f and f −1 will always lie on the line y=x.

<figure id="Figure_03_08_006">

</figure>
:::

::: {#Example_03_08_04 .example}
Restrict the domain and then find the inverse of

$$f(x) = {(x - 2)}^{2} - 3.$$

We can see this is a parabola with vertex at (2,--3) that opens upward.
Because the graph will be decreasing on one side of the vertex and
increasing on the other side, we can restrict this function to a domain
on which it will be one-to-one by limiting the domain to x≥2.

To find the inverse, we will use the vertex form of the quadratic. We
start by replacing f(x) with a simple variable, y, then solve for x.

$$\begin{array}{rclc}
y & = & {{(x - 2)}^{2} - 3} & {\qquad\text{\quad\quad}\text{Interchange~}x\mspace{9mu}\text{and~}y.} \\
x & = & {{(y - 2)}^{2} - 3} & {\qquad\text{\quad\quad}\text{Add~3~to~both~sides}.} \\
{x + 3} & = & {(y - 2)}^{2} & {\qquad\text{\quad\quad}\text{Take~the~square~root}.} \\
{\pm \sqrt{x + 3}} & = & {y - 2} & {\qquad\text{\quad\quad}\text{Add~2~to~both~sides}.} \\
{2 \pm \sqrt{x + 3}} & = & y & {\qquad\text{\quad\quad}\text{Rename~the~function}.} \\
{f^{- 1}(x)} & = & {2 \pm \sqrt{x + 3}} & 
\end{array}$$

Now we need to determine which case to use. Because we restricted our
original function to a domain of x≥2, the outputs of the inverse should
be the same, telling us to utilize the + case

$$f^{- 1}(x) = 2 + \sqrt{x + 3}$$

If the quadratic had not been given in vertex form, rewriting it into
vertex form would be the first step. This way we may easily observe the
coordinates of the vertex to help us restrict the domain.

Notice that we arbitrarily decided to restrict the domain on x≥2. We
could just have easily opted to restrict the domain on x≤2, in which
case f −1 (x)=2− x+3 . Observe the original function graphed on the same
set of axes as its inverse function in [\#](#). Notice that both graphs
show symmetry about the line y=x. The coordinate pair ( 2,−3 ) is on the
graph of f and the coordinate pair ( −3,2 ) is on the graph of f −1 .
Observe from the graph of both functions on the same set of axes that

$$\text{domain~of~}f = \text{range~of}~f^{–1} = \left\lbrack {2,\infty} \right)$$

and

$$\text{domain~of~}f^{–1} = \text{range~of}~f = \left\lbrack {–3,\infty} \right).$$

Finally, observe that the graph of f intersects the graph of f −1 along
the line y=x.

<figure id="Figure_03_08_007">

</figure>
:::

:::: {#fs-id1165137419950 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Find the inverse of the function f(x)= x 2 +1, on the domain x≥0.

f −1 (x)= x−1
::::

## Solving Applications of Radical Functions {#fs-id1165137894462}

Notice that the functions from previous examples were all polynomials,
and their inverses were radical functions. If we want to find the
inverse of a radical function, we will need to restrict the domain of
the answer because the range of the original function is limited.

:::: {#fs-id1165137415876 .note}
::: title
:::

How To

*Given a radical function, find the inverse.*

Determine the range of the original function.

Replace

f

(

x

)

with

y

,

then solve for

x

.

If necessary, restrict the domain of the inverse function to the range
of the original function.
::::

::: {#Example_03_08_05 .example}
Restrict the domain of the function f(x)= x−4 and then find the inverse.

Note that the original function has range f(x)≥0. Replace f(x) with y,
then solve for x.

$$\begin{array}{rclc}
y & = & \sqrt{x - 4} & {\qquad\text{Replace~}f(x)\mspace{9mu}\text{with~}y.} \\
x & = & \sqrt{y - 4} & {\qquad\text{Interchange~}x\mspace{9mu}\text{and~}y.} \\
x & = & \sqrt{y - 4} & {\qquad\text{Square~each~side}.} \\
x^{2} & = & {y - 4} & {\qquad\text{Add~4}.} \\
{x^{2} + 4} & = & y & {\qquad\text{Rename~the~function~}f^{- 1}(x).} \\
{f^{- 1}(x)} & = & {x^{2} + 4} & 
\end{array}$$

Recall that the domain of this function must be limited to the range of
the original function.

$$f^{- 1}(x) = x^{2} + 4,x \geq 0$$

Notice in [\#](#) that the inverse is a reflection of the original
function over the line y=x. Because the original function has only
positive outputs, the inverse function has only positive inputs.

<figure id="Figure_03_08_008">

</figure>
:::

:::: {#fs-id1165137662048 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Restrict the domain and then find the inverse of the function f(x)= 2x+3
.

f −1 (x)= x 2 −3 2 ,x≥0
::::

## Solving Applications of Radical Functions {#fs-id1165137761571}

Radical functions are common in physical models, as we saw in the
section opener. We now have enough tools to be able to solve the problem
posed at the start of the section.

::: {#Example_03_08_06 .example}
Park rangers construct a mound of gravel in the shape of a cone with the
height equal to twice the radius. The volume of the cone in terms of the
radius is given by

$$V = \frac{2}{3}\pi r^{3}$$

Find the inverse of the function V= 2 3 π r 3 that determines the volume
V of a cone and is a function of the radius r. Then use the inverse
function to calculate the radius of such a mound of gravel measuring 100
cubic feet. Use π=3.14.

Start with the given function for V. Notice that the meaningful domain
for the function is r\>0 since negative radii would not make sense in
this context nor would a radius of 0. Also note the range of the
function (hence, the domain of the inverse function) is V\>0. Solve for
r in terms of V, using the method outlined previously. Note that in
real-world applications, we do not swap the variables when finding
inverses. Instead, we change which variable is considered to be the
independent variable.

$$\begin{array}{rclc}
V & = & {\frac{2}{3}\pi r^{3}} & \\
r^{3} & = & \frac{3V}{2\pi} & {\qquad\text{Solve~for~}r^{3}.} \\
r & = & \sqrt[3]{\frac{3V}{2\pi}} & {\qquad\text{Solve~for~}r.}
\end{array}$$

This is the result stated in the section opener. Now evaluate this for
V=100 and π=3.14.

$$\begin{array}{ccl}
r & = & \sqrt[3]{\frac{3V}{2\pi}} \\
 & = & \sqrt[3]{\frac{3 \cdot 100}{2 \cdot 3.14}} \\
 & \approx & \sqrt[3]{47.7707} \\
 & \approx & 3.63
\end{array}$$

Therefore, the radius is about 3.63 ft.
:::

## Determining the Domain of a Radical Function Composed with Other Functions {#fs-id1165137580023}

When radical functions are composed with other functions, determining
domain can become more complicated.

::: {#Example_03_08_07 .example}
Find the domain of the function f(x)= (x+2)(x−3) (x−1) .

Because a square root is only defined when the quantity under the
radical is non-negative, we need to determine where (x+2)(x−3) (x−1) ≥0.
The output of a rational function can change signs (change from positive
to negative or vice versa) at *x*-intercepts and at vertical asymptotes.
For this equation, the graph could change signs at x=--2, 1, and 3.

To determine the intervals on which the rational expression is positive,
we could test some values in the expression or sketch a graph. While
both approaches work equally well, for this example we will use a graph
as shown in [\#](#).

<figure id="Figure_03_08_009">

</figure>

This function has two *x*-intercepts, both of which exhibit linear
behavior near the *x*-intercepts. There is one vertical asymptote,
corresponding to a linear factor; this behavior is similar to the basic
reciprocal toolkit function, and there is no horizontal asymptote
because the degree of the numerator is larger than the degree of the
denominator. There is a *y*-intercept at (0,6).

From the *y*-intercept and *x*-intercept at x=−2, we can sketch the left
side of the graph. From the behavior at the asymptote, we can sketch the
right side of the graph.

From the graph, we can now tell on which intervals the outputs will be
non-negative, so that we can be sure that the original function f( x )
will be defined. f( x ) has domain −2≤x\<1orx≥3, or in interval
notation, \[−2,1)∪\[3,∞).
:::

## Finding Inverses of Rational Functions {#fs-id1165135173899}

As with finding inverses of quadratic functions, it is sometimes
desirable to find the inverse of a rational function, particularly of
rational functions that are the ratio of linear functions, such as in
concentration applications.

::: {#Example_03_08_08 .example}
The function C= 20+0.4n 100+n represents the concentration C of an acid
solution after n mL of 40% solution has been added to 100 mL of a 20%
solution. First, find the inverse of the function; that is, find an
expression for n in terms of C. Then use your result to determine how
much of the 40% solution should be added so that the final mixture is a
35% solution.

We first want the inverse of the function in order to determine how many
mL we need for a given concentration. We will solve for n in terms of C.

$$\begin{array}{rcl}
C & = & \frac{20 + 0.4n}{100 + n} \\
{C(100 + n)} & = & {20 + 0.4n} \\
{100C + Cn} & = & {20 + 0.4n} \\
{100C - 20} & = & {0.4n - Cn} \\
{100C - 20} & = & {(0.4 - C)n} \\
n & = & \frac{100C - 20}{0.4 - C}
\end{array}$$

Now evaluate this function at 35%, which is C=0.35.

$$\begin{array}{ccl}
n & = & \frac{100(0.35) - 20}{0.4 - 0.35} \\
 & = & \frac{15}{0.05} \\
 & = & 300
\end{array}$$

We can conclude that 300 mL of the 40% solution should be added.
:::

:::: {#fs-id1165137697102 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Find the inverse of the function f(x)= x+3 x−2 .

f −1 (x)= 2x+3 x−1
::::

:::: {#fs-id1165137551968 .note}
::: title
:::

Media

Access these online resources for additional instruction and practice
with inverses and radical functions.

Graphing the Basic Square Root Function

Find the Inverse of a Square Root Function

Find the Inverse of a Rational Function

Find the Inverse of a Rational Function and an Inverse Function Value

Inverse Functions
::::

# Key Concepts {#fs-id1165135192373}

The inverse of a quadratic function is a square root function.

If

f

−

1

is the inverse of a function

f

,

then

f

is the inverse of the function

f

−

1

.

See

.

While it is not possible to find an inverse of most polynomial
functions, some basic polynomials are invertible. See

.

To find the inverse of certain functions, we must restrict the function
to a domain on which it will be one-to-one. See

and

.

When finding the inverse of a radical function, we need a restriction on
the domain of the answer. See

and

.

Inverse and radical and functions can be used to solve application
problems. See

and

.

# Section Exercises {#fs-id1165137414774}

## Verbal {#fs-id1165137414778}

Explain why we cannot find inverse functions for all polynomial
functions.

It can be too difficult or impossible to solve for x in terms of y.

Why must we restrict the domain of a quadratic function when finding its
inverse?

When finding the inverse of a radical function, what restriction will we
need to make?

We will need a restriction on the domain of the answer.

The inverse of a quadratic function will always take what form?

## Algebraic {#fs-id1165137661784}

For the following exercises, find the inverse of the function on the
given domain.

f( x )= ( x−4 ) 2 , \[4,∞)

f −1 (x)= x +4

f( x )= ( x+2 ) 2 , \[−2,∞)

f(x)= ( x+1 ) 2 −3, \[−1,∞)

f −1 (x)= x+3 −1

f(x)=3 x 2 +5,( ∞,0 \]

f( x )=12− x 2 , \[0,∞)

f −1 (x)= 12−x

f( x )=9− x 2 , \[0,∞)

f(x)=2 x 2 +4, \[0,∞)

f −1 (x)= x−4 2

For the following exercises, find the inverse of the functions.

f(x)= x 3 +5

f( x )=3 x 3 +1

f −1 (x)= x−1 3 3

f(x)=4− x 3

f( x )=4−2 x 3

f −1 (x)= 4−x 2 3

For the following exercises, find the inverse of the functions.

f(x)= 2x+1

f(x)= 3−4x

f −1 (x)= 3−x2 4 ,\[ 0,∞ )

f( x )=9+ 4x−4

f( x )= 6x−8 +5

f −1 (x)= (x-5)2+8 6

f( x )=9+2 x 3

f( x )=3− x 3

f −1 (x)= (3-x)2

f( x )= 2 x+8

f( x )= 3 x−4

f −1 (x)= 4x+3 x

f( x )= x+3 x+7

f( x )= x-2 x+7

f −1 (x)= 7x−3 1−x

f( x )= 3x+4 5−4x

f( x )= 5x+1 2−5x

f −1 (x)= 2x-1 5x+5

f(x)= x 2 +2x, \[−1,∞)

f(x)= x 2 +4x+1, \[−2,∞)

f −1 (x)= x+3 −2

f(x)= x 2 −6x+3, \[3,∞)

## Graphical {#fs-id1165135193360}

For the following exercises, find the inverse of the function and graph
both the function and its inverse.

f(x)= x 2 +2,x≥0

f −1 (x)= x−2

f(x)=4− x 2 ,x≥0

f(x)= ( x+3 ) 2 ,x≥−3

f −1 (x)= x−3

f(x)= ( x−4 ) 2 ,x≥4

f(x)= x 3 +3

f −1 (x)= x−3 3

f(x)=1− x 3

f(x)= x 2 +4x,x≥−2

f −1 (x)= x+4 -2

f(x)= x 2 −6x+1,x≥3

f(x)= 2 x

f(x)= 1 x 2 ,x≥0

For the following exercises, use a graph to help determine the domain of
the functions.

f(x)= (x+1)(x−1) x

\[-1,0)∪\[1,∞)

f(x)= (x+2)(x−3) x−1

f(x)= x(x+3) x−4

\[-3,0\]∪(4,∞)

f(x)= x 2 −x−20 x−2

f(x)= 9− x 2 x+4

\[-∞,-4\]⋅\[-3,3\]

## Technology {#fs-id1165137676077}

For the following exercises, use a calculator to graph the function.
Then, using the graph, give three points on the graph of the inverse
with *y*-coordinates given.

f(x)= x 3 −x−2,y=1,2,3

f(x)= x 3 +x−2,y=0,1,2

(--2, 0), (0, 1), (8, 2)

f(x)= x 3 +3x−4,y=0,1,2

f(x)= x 3 +8x−4,y=−1,0,1

(--13, --1), (--4, 0), (5, 1)

f(x)= x 4 +5x+1,y=−1,0,1

## Extensions {#fs-id1165137833145}

For the following exercises, find the inverse of the functions with
a,b,c positive real numbers.

f(x)=a x 3 +b

f −1 (x)= x−b a 3

f(x)= x 2 +bx

f(x)= a x 2 -b

f −1 (x)= x 2 -b a

f(x)= ax+b 3

f(x)= ax+b x+c

f −1 (x)= c x - b a - x

## Real-World Applications {#fs-id1165135347473}

For the following exercises, determine the function described and then
use it to answer the question.

An object dropped from a height of 200 meters has a height, h( t ), in
meters after t seconds have lapsed, such that h(t)=200−4.9 t 2 . Express
t as a function of height, h, and find the time to reach a height of 50
meters.

An object dropped from a height of 600 feet has a height, h( t ), in
feet after t seconds have elapsed, such that h(t)=600−16 t 2 . Express t
as a function of height h, and find the time to reach a height of 400
feet.

t(h)= 600-h 16 , 3.54 seconds

The volume, V, of a sphere in terms of its radius, r, is given by V(r)=
4 3 π r 3 . Express r as a function of V, and find the radius of a
sphere with volume of 200 cubic feet.

The surface area, A, of a sphere in terms of its radius, r, is given by
A(r)=4π r 2 . Express r as a function of A, and find the radius of a
sphere with a surface area of 1000 square inches.

r(A)= A 4π , ≈ 8.92 in.

A container holds 100 mL of a solution that is 25 mL acid. If n mL of a
solution that is 60% acid is added, the function C(n)= 25+.6n 100+n
gives the concentration, C, as a function of the number of mL added, n.
Express n as a function of C and determine the number of mL that need to
be added to have a solution that is 50% acid.

The period T, in seconds, of a simple pendulum as a function of its
length l, in feet, is given by T(l)=2π l 32.2 . Express l as a function
of T and determine the length of a pendulum with period of 2 seconds.

l(T)=32.2(T2π), ≈ 3.26 ft

The volume of a cylinder , V, in terms of radius, r, and height, h, is
given by V=π r 2 h. If a cylinder has a height of 6 meters, express the
radius as a function of V and find the radius of a cylinder with volume
of 300 cubic meters.

The surface area, A, of a cylinder in terms of its radius, r, and
height, h, is given by A=2π r 2 +2πrh. If the height of the cylinder is
4 feet, express the radius as a function of A and find the radius if the
surface area is 200 square feet.

r(A)= A+ 8π 2π --2, 3.99 ft

The volume of a right circular cone, V, in terms of its radius, r, and
its height, h, is given by V= 1 3 π r 2 h. Express r in terms of V if
the height of the cone is 12 feet and find the radius of a cone with
volume of 50 cubic inches.

Consider a cone with height of 30 feet. Express the radius, r, in terms
of the volume, V, and find the radius of a cone with volume of 1000
cubic feet.

r(V)= V 10π , ≈ 5.64 ft

# 

invertible function

any function that has an inverse function
