m51252

> In this section, you will:
>
> Plot ordered pairs in a Cartesian coordinate system.
>
> Graph equations by plotting points.
>
> Graph equations with a graphing utility.
>
> Find x-intercepts and y-intercepts.
>
> Use the distance formula.
>
> Use the midpoint formula.

b64cdbd9-26f9-4dfc-99d2-ed5a9f99bae8

#  {#eip-941}

## Learning Objectives {#fs-idm365322272}

Plot points on a real number line (IA 1.4.7)

Plot points in a rectangular coordinate system (IA 3.1.1)

## Objective 1: Plot points on a real number line (IA 1.4.7) {#eip-942}

:::: {#eip-452 .example}
::: title
Locate Fractions and Decimals on the Number Line
:::

We now want to include fractions and decimals on the number line.

In this example we will locate and plot the following points:
15,−45,3,74,−92,−5 and 83

We'll start with the whole numbers 3 and −5 because they are the easiest
to plot. Use zero as your starting point, move to the right for positive
numbers and to the left for negative numbers.

The proper fractions listed are 15 and −45. We know the proper fraction
15 has value less than one and so would be located between 0 and 1. The
denominator is 5, so imagine dividing the unit from 0 to 1 into 5 equal
parts.

Similarly, −45 is between 0 and −1. After dividing the unit into 5 equal
parts we plot −45.

Finally, look at the improper fractions 74,-92, and 83. Locating these
points may be easier if you change each of them to a mixed number or use
your calculator to get a decimal approximation.

The figure below shows the number line with all the points plotted.
::::

### Practice Makes Perfect {#fs-id1167829693724}

-5,36,53,312,−810

-π,25,134,0.8,2.55,-1516

e,5,-214,-0.75,-52

## Objective 2: Plot points in a rectangular coordinate system (IA 3.1.1) {#eip-943}

::: {#eip-605 .example}
Plot each point in the rectangular coordinate system and identify the
quadrant in which the point is located:

ⓐ (−5,4) ⓑ (−3,−4) ⓒ (2,−3) ⓓ (0,−1) ⓔ (3,52).

The first number of the coordinate pair is the *x*-coordinate, and the
second number is the *y*-coordinate. To plot each point, sketch a
vertical line through the *x*-coordinate and a horizontal line through
the *y*-coordinate. Their intersection is the point. ⓐ Since x=−5, the
point is to the left of the *y*-axis. Also, since y=4, the point is
above the *x*-axis. The point (−5,4) is in Quadrant II. ⓑ Since x=−3,
the point is to the left of the *y*-axis. Also, since y=−4, the point is
below the *x*-axis. The point (−3,−4) is in Quadrant III. ⓒ Since x=2,
the point is to the right of the *y*-axis. Since y=−3, the point is
below the *x*-axis. The point (2,−3) is in Quadrant IV. ⓓ Since x=0, the
point whose coordinates are (0,−1) is on the *y*-axis. ⓔ Since x=3, the
point is to the right of the *y*-axis. Since y=52, the point is above
the *x*-axis. (It may be helpful to write 52 as a mixed number or
decimal.) The point (3,52) is in Quadrant I.
:::

### Practice Makes Perfect {#fs-id1162829693724}

*Plot Points in a Rectangular Coordinate System*

In the following exercises, plot each point in a rectangular coordinate
system and identify the quadrant in which the point is located.

ⓐ (−4,2) ⓑ (−1,−2) ⓒ (3,−5) ⓓ (−3,0) ⓔ (53,2)

ⓐ (−2,−3) ⓑ (3,−3) ⓒ (−4,1) ⓓ (4,−1) ⓔ (32,1)

ⓐ (3,−1) ⓑ (−3,1) ⓒ (−2,0) ⓓ (−4,−3) ⓔ (1,145)

ⓐ (−1,1) ⓑ (−2,−1) ⓒ (2,0) ⓓ (1,−4) ⓔ (3,72)

<figure id="Figure_02_01_001">

</figure>

Tracie set out from Elmhurst, IL, to go to Franklin Park. On the way,
she made a few stops to do errands. Each stop is indicated by a red dot
in [\#](#). Laying a rectangular coordinate grid over the map, we can
see that each stop aligns with an intersection of grid lines. In this
section, we will learn how to use grid lines to describe locations and
changes in locations.

# Plotting Ordered Pairs in the Cartesian Coordinate System {#fs-id1392675}

An old story describes how seventeenth-century philosopher/mathematician
René Descartes, while sick in bed, invented the system that has become
the foundation of algebra. According to the story, Descartes was staring
at a fly crawling on the ceiling when he realized that he could describe
the fly's location in relation to the perpendicular lines formed by the
adjacent walls of his room. He viewed the perpendicular lines as
horizontal and vertical axes. Further, by dividing each axis into equal
unit lengths, Descartes saw that it was possible to locate any object in
a two-dimensional plane using just two numbers---the displacement from
the horizontal axis and the displacement from the vertical axis.

While there is evidence that ideas similar to Descartes' grid system
existed centuries earlier, it was Descartes who introduced the
components that comprise the Cartesian coordinate system, a grid system
having perpendicular axes. Descartes named the horizontal axis the
*x-*axis and the vertical axis the *y-*axis.

The Cartesian coordinate system, also called the rectangular coordinate
system, is based on a two-dimensional plane consisting of the *x*-axis
and the *y*-axis. Perpendicular to each other, the axes divide the plane
into four sections. Each section is called a quadrant; the quadrants are
numbered counterclockwise as shown in [\#](#)

<figure id="Figure_02_01_002">

</figure>

The center of the plane is the point at which the two axes cross. It is
known as the origin, or point (0,0). From the origin, each axis is
further divided into equal units: increasing, positive numbers to the
right on the *x-*axis and up the *y-*axis; decreasing, negative numbers
to the left on the *x-*axis and down the *y-*axis. The axes extend to
positive and negative infinity as shown by the arrowheads in [\#](#).

<figure id="Figure_02_01_003">

</figure>

Each point in the plane is identified by its *x-*coordinate, or
horizontal displacement from the origin, and its *y-*coordinate, or
vertical displacement from the origin. Together, we write them as an
ordered pair indicating the combined distance from the origin in the
form ( x,y ). An ordered pair is also known as a coordinate pair because
it consists of *x-* and *y*-coordinates. For example, we can represent
the point (3,−1) in the plane by moving three units to the right of the
origin in the horizontal direction, and one unit down in the vertical
direction. See [\#](#).

<figure id="Figure_02_01_004">

</figure>

When dividing the axes into equally spaced increments, note that the
*x-*axis may be considered separately from the *y-*axis. In other words,
while the *x-*axis may be divided and labeled according to consecutive
integers, the *y-*axis may be divided and labeled by increments of 2, or
10, or 100. In fact, the axes may represent other units, such as years
against the balance in a savings account, or quantity against cost, and
so on. Consider the rectangular coordinate system primarily as a method
for showing the relationship between two quantities.

:::: {#fs-id2782510 .note}
::: title
Cartesian Coordinate System
:::

A two-dimensional plane where the

x

-axis is the horizontal axis

y

-axis is the vertical axis

A point in the plane is defined as an ordered pair, ( x,y ), such that
*x* is determined by its horizontal distance from the origin and *y* is
determined by its vertical distance from the origin.
::::

::: {#Example_02_01_01 .example}
Plot the points ( −2,4 ), ( 3,3 ), and ( 0,−3 ) in the plane.

To plot the point ( −2,4 ), begin at the origin. The *x*-coordinate is
--2, so move two units to the left. The *y*-coordinate is 4, so then
move four units up in the positive *y* direction.

To plot the point ( 3,3 ), begin again at the origin. The *x*-coordinate
is 3, so move three units to the right. The *y*-coordinate is also 3, so
move three units up in the positive *y* direction.

To plot the point ( 0,−3 ), begin again at the origin. The
*x*-coordinate is 0. This tells us not to move in either direction along
the *x*-axis. The *y*-coordinate is --3, so move three units down in the
negative *y* direction. See the graph in [\#](#).

<figure id="Figure_02_01_005">

</figure>

Note that when either coordinate is zero, the point must be on an axis.
If the *x*-coordinate is zero, the point is on the *y*-axis. If the
*y*-coordinate is zero, the point is on the *x*-axis.
:::

# Graphing Equations by Plotting Points {#fs-id1940663}

We can plot a set of points to represent an equation. When such an
equation contains both an *x* variable and a *y* variable, it is called
an equation in two variables. Its graph is called a graph in two
variables. Any graph on a two-dimensional plane is a graph in two
variables.

Suppose we want to graph the equation y=2x−1. We can begin by
substituting a value for *x* into the equation and determining the
resulting value of *y*. Each pair of *x*- and *y*-values is an ordered
pair that can be plotted. [\#](#) lists values of *x* from --3 to 3 and
the resulting values for *y*.

  ---- -------------- -----------
  x    y=2x−1         ( x,y )
  −3   y=2(−3)−1=−7   ( −3,−7 )
  −2   y=2(−2)−1=−5   ( −2,−5 )
  −1   y=2(−1)−1=−3   ( −1,−3 )
  0    y=2(0)−1=−1    ( 0,−1 )
  1    y=2(1)−1=1     ( 1,1 )
  2    y=2(2)−1=3     ( 2,3 )
  3    y=2(3)−1=5     ( 3,5 )
  ---- -------------- -----------

We can plot the points in the table. The points for this particular
equation form a line, so we can connect them. See [\#](#)*.* This is not
true for all equations.

<figure id="Figure_02_01_006">

</figure>

Note that the *x-*values chosen are arbitrary, regardless of the type of
equation we are graphing. Of course, some situations may require
particular values of *x* to be plotted in order to see a particular
result. Otherwise, it is logical to choose values that can be calculated
easily, and it is always a good idea to choose values that are both
negative and positive. There is no rule dictating how many points to
plot, although we need at least two to graph a line. Keep in mind,
however, that the more points we plot, the more accurately we can sketch
the graph.

:::: {#fs-id1913210 .note}
::: title
:::

How To

*Given an equation, graph by plotting points.*

Make a table with one column labeled

x

, a second column labeled with the equation, and a third column listing
the resulting ordered pairs.

Enter

x-

values down the first column using positive and negative values.
Selecting the

x-

values in numerical order will make the graphing simpler.

Select

x-

values that will yield

y-

values with little effort, preferably ones that can be calculated
mentally.

Plot the ordered pairs.

Connect the points if they form a line.
::::

::: {#Example_02_01_02 .example}
Graph the equation y=−x+2 by plotting points.

First, we construct a table similar to [\#](#). Choose *x* values and
calculate *y.*

  ---- --------------- ----------
  x    y=−x+2          ( x,y )
  −5   y=−( −5 )+2=7   ( −5,7 )
  −3   y=−( −3 )+2=5   ( −3,5 )
  −1   y=−( −1 )+2=3   ( −1,3 )
  0    y=−( 0 )+2=2    ( 0,2 )
  1    y=−( 1 )+2=1    ( 1,1 )
  3    y=−( 3 )+2=−1   ( 3,−1 )
  5    y=−( 5 )+2=−3   ( 5,−3 )
  ---- --------------- ----------

Now, plot the points. Connect them if they form a line. See [\#](#)

<figure id="Figure_02_01_007">

</figure>
:::

:::: {#fs-id833198 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Construct a table and graph the equation by plotting points: y= 1 2 x+2.

  ---- ---------------------- -------------
  x    y= 1 2 x+2             ( x,y )
  −2   y= 1 2 ( −2 )+2=1      ( −2,1 )
  −1   y= 1 2 ( −1 )+2= 3 2   ( −1, 3 2 )
  0    y= 1 2 ( 0 )+2=2       ( 0,2 )
  1    y= 1 2 ( 1 )+2= 5 2    ( 1, 5 2 )
  2    y= 1 2 ( 2 )+2=3       ( 2,3 )
  ---- ---------------------- -------------
::::

# Graphing Equations with a Graphing Utility {#fs-id1901322}

Most graphing calculators require similar techniques to graph an
equation. The equations sometimes have to be manipulated so they are
written in the style y=\_\_\_\_\_. The TI-84 Plus, and many other
calculator makes and models, have a mode function, which allows the
window (the screen for viewing the graph) to be altered so the pertinent
parts of a graph can be seen.

For example, the equation y=2x−20 has been entered in the TI-84 Plus
shown in [\#](#)*a.* In [\#](#)*b,* the resulting graph is shown. Notice
that we cannot see on the screen where the graph crosses the axes. The
standard window screen on the TI-84 Plus shows −10≤x≤10, and −10≤y≤10.
See [\#](#)*c*.

<figure id="Figure_02_01_09">

</figure>

By changing the window to show more of the positive *x-*axis and more of
the negative *y-*axis, we have a much better view of the graph and the
*x-* and *y-*intercepts. See [\#](#)*a* and [\#](#)*b.*

<figure id="Figure_02_01_10">

</figure>

::: {#Example_02_01_03 .example}
Use a graphing utility to graph the equation: y=− 2 3 x+ 4 3 .

Enter the equation in the *y=* function of the calculator. Set the
window settings so that both the *x-* and *y-* intercepts are showing in
the window. See [\#](#).

<figure id="Figure_02_01_011">

</figure>
:::

# Finding *x-*intercepts and *y-*intercepts {#fs-id1340475}

The intercepts of a graph are points at which the graph crosses the
axes. The *x-*intercept is the point at which the graph crosses the
*x-*axis. At this point, the *y-*coordinate is zero. The *y-*intercept
is the point at which the graph crosses the *y-*axis. At this point, the
*x-*coordinate is zero.

To determine the *x-*intercept, we set *y* equal to zero and solve for
*x*. Similarly, to determine the *y-*intercept, we set *x* equal to zero
and solve for *y*. For example, lets find the intercepts of the equation
y=3x−1.

To find the *x-*intercept, set y=0.

$$\begin{array}{ll}
{\mspace{9mu} y = 3x - 1} & \\
{\mspace{9mu} 0 = 3x - 1} & \\
{\mspace{9mu} 1 = 3x} & \\
{\frac{1}{3} = x} & \\
\left( {\frac{1}{3},0} \right) & {x\text{−intercept}}
\end{array}$$

To find the *y-*intercept, set x=0.

$$\begin{array}{l}
{y = 3x - 1} \\
{y = 3(0) - 1} \\
{y = -1} \\
{(0,-1)\mspace{54mu} y\text{−intercept}}
\end{array}$$

We can confirm that our results make sense by observing a graph of the
equation as in [\#](#). Notice that the graph crosses the axes where we
predicted it would.

<figure id="Figure_02_01_012">

</figure>

:::: {#fs-id1780189 .note}
::: title
Given an equation, find the intercepts.
:::

Find the

x

-intercept by setting

y

=

0

and solving for

x

.

Find the

y-

intercept by setting

x

=

0

and solving for

y

.
::::

::: {#Example_02_01_04 .example}
Find the intercepts of the equation y=−3x−4. Then sketch the graph using
only the intercepts.

Set y=0 to find the *x-*intercept.

$$\begin{array}{l}
{\quad y = -3x - 4} \\
{\quad 0 = -3x - 4} \\
{\quad 4 = -3x} \\
{- \frac{4}{3} = x} \\
{\left( {- \frac{4}{3},0} \right)\mspace{54mu} x\text{−intercept}}
\end{array}$$

Set x=0 to find the *y-*intercept.

$$\begin{array}{l}
{y = -3x - 4} \\
{y = -3(0) - 4} \\
{y = -4} \\
{(0,-4)\mspace{63mu} y\text{−intercept}}
\end{array}$$

Plot both points, and draw a line passing through them as in [\#](#).

<figure id="Figure_02_01_013">

</figure>
:::

:::: {#fs-id1518804 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Find the intercepts of the equation and sketch the graph: y=− 3 4 x+3.

*x*-intercept is ( 4,0 ); *y-*intercept is ( 0,3 ).
::::

# Using the Distance Formula {#fs-id1280821}

Derived from the Pythagorean Theorem, the distance formula is used to
find the distance between two points in the plane. The Pythagorean
Theorem, a 2 + b 2 = c 2 , is based on a right triangle where *a* and
*b* are the lengths of the legs adjacent to the right angle, and *c* is
the length of the hypotenuse. See [\#](#).

<figure id="Figure_02_01_015">

</figure>

The relationship of sides \| x 2 − x 1 \| and \| y 2 − y 1 \| to side
*d* is the same as that of sides *a* and *b* to side *c.* We use the
absolute value symbol to indicate that the length is a positive number
because the absolute value of any number is positive. (For example, \|
−3 \|=3. ) The symbols \| x 2 − x 1 \| and \| y 2 − y 1 \| indicate that
the lengths of the sides of the triangle are positive. To find the
length *c*, take the square root of both sides of the Pythagorean
Theorem.

$$c^{2} = a^{2} + b^{2}\rightarrow c = \sqrt{a^{2} + b^{2}}$$

It follows that the distance formula is given as

$$d^{2} = {(x_{2} - x_{1})}^{2} + {(y_{2} - y_{1})}^{2}\rightarrow d = \sqrt{{(x_{2} - x_{1})}^{2} + {(y_{2} - y_{1})}^{2}}$$

We do not have to use the absolute value symbols in this definition
because any number squared is positive.

:::: {#fs-id1521890 .note}
::: title
The Distance Formula
:::

Given endpoints ( x 1 , y 1 ) and ( x 2 , y 2 ), the distance between
two points is given by

$$d = \sqrt{\left( {x_{2} - x_{1}} \right)^{2} + \left( {y_{2} - y_{1}} \right)^{2}}$$
::::

::: {#Example_02_01_05 .example}
Find the distance between the points ( −3,−1 ) and ( 2,3 ).

Let us first look at the graph of the two points. Connect the points to
form a right triangle as in [\#](#)*.*

<figure id="Figure_02_01_016">

</figure>

Then, calculate the length of *d* using the distance formula.

$$\begin{array}{l}
 \\
\begin{array}{l}
{d = \sqrt{{(x_{2} - x_{1})}^{2} + {(y_{2} - y_{1})}^{2}}} \\
{d = \sqrt{{(2 - (-3))}^{2} + {(3 - (-1))}^{2}}} \\
{ = \sqrt{{(5)}^{2} + {(4)}^{2}}} \\
{ = \sqrt{25 + 16}} \\
{ = \sqrt{41}}
\end{array}
\end{array}$$
:::

:::: {#fs-id1574404 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Find the distance between two points: ( 1,4 ) and ( 11,9 ).

125 =5 5
::::

::: {#Example_02_01_06 .example}
Let's return to the situation introduced at the beginning of this
section.

Tracie set out from Elmhurst, IL, to go to Franklin Park. On the way,
she made a few stops to do errands. Each stop is indicated by a red dot
in [\#](#). Find the total distance that Tracie traveled. Compare this
with the distance between her starting and final positions.

The first thing we should do is identify ordered pairs to describe each
position. If we set the starting position at the origin, we can identify
each of the other points by counting units east (right) and north (up)
on the grid. For example, the first stop is 1 block east and 1 block
north, so it is at ( 1,1 ). The next stop is 5 blocks to the east, so it
is at ( 5,1 ). After that, she traveled 3 blocks east and 2 blocks north
to ( 8,3 ). Lastly, she traveled 4 blocks north to ( 8,7 ). We can label
these points on the grid as in [\#](#).

<figure id="Figure_02_01_017">

</figure>

Next, we can calculate the distance. Note that each grid unit represents
1,000 feet.

From her starting location to her first stop at

(

1

,

1

)

,

Tracie might have driven north 1,000 feet and then east 1,000 feet, or
vice versa. Either way, she drove 2,000 feet to her first stop.

Her second stop is at

(

5

,

1

)

.

So from

(

1

,

1

)

to

(

5

,

1

)

,

Tracie drove east 4,000 feet.

Her third stop is at

(

8

,

3

)

.

There are a number of routes from

(

5

,

1

)

to

(

8

,

3

)

.

Whatever route Tracie decided to use, the distance is the same, as there
are no angular streets between the two points. Let's say she drove east
3,000 feet and then north 2,000 feet for a total of 5,000 feet.

Tracie's final stop is at

(

8

,

7

)

.

This is a straight drive north from

(

8

,

3

)

for a total of 4,000 feet.

Next, we will add the distances listed in [\#](#).

  From/To              Number of Feet Driven
  -------------------- -----------------------
  ( 0,0 ) to ( 1,1 )   2,000
  ( 1,1 ) to ( 5,1 )   4,000
  ( 5,1 ) to ( 8,3 )   5,000
  ( 8,3 ) to ( 8,7 )   4,000
  Total                15,000

The total distance Tracie drove is 15,000 feet, or 2.84 miles. This is
not, however, the actual distance between her starting and ending
positions. To find this distance, we can use the distance formula
between the points ( 0,0 ) and ( 8,7 ).

$$\begin{array}{l}
{d = \sqrt{{(8 - 0)}^{2} + {(7 - 0)}^{2}}} \\
{ = \sqrt{64 + 49}} \\
{ = \sqrt{113}} \\
{ \approx 10.63\mspace{9mu}\text{units}}
\end{array}$$

At 1,000 feet per grid unit, the distance between Elmhurst, IL, to
Franklin Park is 10,630.14 feet, or 2.01 miles. The distance formula
results in a shorter calculation because it is based on the hypotenuse
of a right triangle, a straight diagonal from the origin to the point (
8,7 ). Perhaps you have heard the saying "as the crow flies," which
means the shortest distance between two points because a crow can fly in
a straight line even though a person on the ground has to travel a
longer distance on existing roadways.
:::

# Using the Midpoint Formula {#fs-id2507035}

When the endpoints of a line segment are known, we can find the point
midway between them. This point is known as the midpoint and the formula
is known as the midpoint formula. Given the endpoints of a line segment,
( x 1 , y 1 ) and ( x 2 , y 2 ), the midpoint formula states how to find
the coordinates of the midpoint M.

$$M = \left( {\frac{x_{1} + x_{2}}{2},\frac{y_{1} + y_{2}}{2}} \right)$$

A graphical view of a midpoint is shown in [\#](#). Notice that the line
segments on either side of the midpoint are congruent.

<figure id="Figure_02_01_018">

</figure>

::: {#Example_02_01_07 .example}
Find the midpoint of the line segment with the endpoints ( 7,−2 ) and (
9,5 ).

Use the formula to find the midpoint of the line segment.

$$\begin{array}{l}
{\left( {\frac{x_{1} + x_{2}}{2},\frac{y_{1} + y_{2}}{2}} \right) = \left( {\frac{7 + 9}{2},\frac{- 2 + 5}{2}} \right)} \\
{\mspace{117mu} = \left( {8,\frac{3}{2}} \right)}
\end{array}$$
:::

:::: {#fs-id1537533 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Find the midpoint of the line segment with endpoints ( −2,−1 ) and (
−8,6 ).

( −5, 5 2 )
::::

::: {#Example_02_01_08 .example}
The diameter of a circle has endpoints ( −1,−4 ) and ( 5,−4 ). Find the
center of the circle.

The center of a circle is the center, or midpoint, of its diameter.
Thus, the midpoint formula will yield the center point.

$$\begin{matrix}
\left( {\frac{x_{1} + x_{2}}{2},\frac{y_{1} + y_{2}}{2}} \right) \\
{\left( {\frac{- 1 + 5}{2},\frac{- 4 - 4}{2}} \right) = \left( {\frac{4}{2}, - \frac{8}{2}} \right) = (2,-4)}
\end{matrix}$$
:::

:::: {#fs-id1539521 .note}
::: title
:::

Media

Access these online resources for additional instruction and practice
with the Cartesian coordinate system.

Plotting points on the coordinate plane

Find x and y intercepts based on the graph of a line
::::

# Key Concepts {#fs-id2721419}

We can locate, or plot, points in the Cartesian coordinate system using
ordered pairs, which are defined as displacement from the

x-

axis and displacement from the

y-

axis. See

.

An equation can be graphed in the plane by creating a table of values
and plotting points. See

.

Using a graphing calculator or a computer program makes graphing
equations faster and more accurate. Equations usually have to be entered
in the form

y=

\_\_\_\_\_. See

.

Finding the

x-

and

y-

intercepts can define the graph of a line. These are the points where
the graph crosses the axes. See

.

The distance formula is derived from the Pythagorean Theorem and is used
to find the length of a line segment. See

and

.

The midpoint formula provides a method of finding the coordinates of the
midpoint dividing the sum of the

x

-coordinates and the sum of the

y

-coordinates of the endpoints by 2. See

and

.

# Section Exercises {#fs-id1553580}

## Verbal {#fs-id2496131}

Is it possible for a point plotted in the Cartesian coordinate system to
not lie in one of the four quadrants? Explain.

Answers may vary. Yes. It is possible for a point to be on the *x*-axis
or on the *y*-axis and therefore is considered to NOT be in one of the
quadrants.

Describe the process for finding the *x-*intercept and the *y*-intercept
of a graph algebraically.

Describe in your own words what the *y*-intercept of a graph is.

The *y*-intercept is the point where the graph crosses the *y*-axis.

When using the distance formula d= ( x 2 − x 1 ) 2 + ( y 2 − y 1 ) 2 ,
explain the correct order of operations that are to be performed to
obtain the correct answer.

## Algebraic {#fs-id3263952}

For each of the following exercises, find the *x*-intercept and the
*y*-intercept without graphing. Write the coordinates of each intercept.

y=−3x+6

The *x-*intercept is ( 2,0 ) and the *y*-intercept is ( 0,6 ).

4y=2x−1

3x−2y=6

The *x-*intercept is ( 2,0 ) and the *y*-intercept is ( 0,−3 ).

4x−3=2y

3x+8y=9

The *x-*intercept is ( 3,0 ) and the *y*-intercept is ( 0, 9 8 ).

2x− 2 3 = 3 4 y+3

For each of the following exercises, solve the equation for *y* in terms
of *x*.

4x+2y=8

y=4−2x

3x−2y=6

2x=5−3y

y= 5−2x 3

x−2y=7

5y+4=10x

y=2x− 4 5

5x+2y=0

For each of the following exercises, find the distance between the two
points. Simplify your answers, and write the exact answer in simplest
radical form for irrational answers.

(−4,1) and (3,−4)

d= 74

(2,−5) and (7,4)

(5,0) and (5,6)

d= 36 =6

(−4,3) and (10,3)

Find the distance between the two points given using your calculator,
and round your answer to the nearest hundredth.

(19,12) and (41,71)

d≈62.97

For each of the following exercises, find the coordinates of the
midpoint of the line segment that joins the two given points.

(−5,−6) and (4,2)

(−1,1) and (7,−4)

( 3, −3 2 )

(−5,−3) and (−2,−8)

(0,7) and (4,−9)

( 2,−1 )

(−43,17) and (23,−34)

## Graphical {#fs-id2434980}

For each of the following exercises, identify the information requested.

What are the coordinates of the origin?

( 0,0 )

If a point is located on the *y*-axis, what is the *x*-coordinate?

If a point is located on the *x*-axis, what is the *y*-coordinate?

y=0

For each of the following exercises, plot the three points on the given
coordinate plane. State whether the three points you plotted appear to
be collinear (on the same line).

( 4,1 )( −2,−3 )( 5,0 )

(−1,2)(0,4)(2,1)

not collinear

( −3,0 )( −3,4 )( −3,−3 )

Name the coordinates of the points graphed.

A: ( −3,2 ),B: ( 1,3 ),C: ( 4,0 )

Name the quadrant in which the following points would be located. If the
point is on an axis, name the axis.

ⓐ ( −3,−4 ) ⓑ ( −5,0 ) ⓒ ( 1,−4 ) ⓓ ( −2,7 ) ⓔ ( 0,−3 )

For each of the following exercises, construct a table and graph the
equation by plotting at least three points.

y= 1 3 x+2

  ---- ---
  x    y
  −3   1
  0    2
  3    3
  6    4
  ---- ---

y=−3x+1

2y=x+3

  ----- -----
  *x*   *y*
  --3   0
  0     1.5
  3     3
  ----- -----

## Numeric {#fs-id1387762}

For each of the following exercises, find and plot the *x-* and
*y*-intercepts, and graph the straight line based on those two points.

4x−3y=12

x−2y=8

y−5=5x

3y=−2x+6

y= x−3 2

For each of the following exercises, use the graph in the figure below.

Find the distance between the two endpoints using the distance formula.
Round to three decimal places.

d=8.246

Find the coordinates of the midpoint of the line segment connecting the
two points.

Find the distance that ( −3,4 ) is from the origin.

d=5

Find the distance that ( 5,2 ) is from the origin. Round to three
decimal places.

Which point is closer to the origin?

( −3,4 )

## Technology {#fs-id2437604}

For the following exercises, use your graphing calculator to input the
linear graphs in the Y= graph menu.

After graphing it, use the 2nd CALC button and 1:value button, hit
enter. At the lower part of the screen you will see "x=" and a blinking
cursor. You may enter any number for *x* and it will display the *y*
value for any *x* value you input. Use this and plug in *x* = 0, thus
finding the *y*-intercept, for each of the following graphs.

Y 1 =−2x+5

Y 1 = 3x−8 4

x=0        y=−2

Y 1 = x+5 2

For the following exercises, use your graphing calculator to input the
linear graphs in the Y= graph menu.

After graphing it, use the 2nd *CALC* button and 2:zero button, hit
*ENTER*. At the lower part of the screen you will see "left bound?" and
a blinking cursor on the graph of the line. Move this cursor to the left
of the *x*-intercept, hit *ENTER*. Now it says "right bound?" Move the
cursor to the right of the *x*-intercept, hit *ENTER*. Now it says
"guess?" Move your cursor to the left somewhere in between the left and
right bound near the *x*-intercept. Hit *ENTER*. At the bottom of your
screen it will display the coordinates of the *x-*intercept or the
"zero" to the *y*-value. Use this to find the *x*-intercept.

Note: With linear/straight line functions the zero is not really a
"guess," but it is necessary to enter a "guess" so it will search and
find the exact *x*-intercept between your right and left boundaries.
With other types of functions (more than one *x*-intercept), they may be
irrational numbers so "guess" is more appropriate to give it the correct
limits to find a very close approximation between the left and right
boundaries.

Y 1 =−8x+6

x=0.75y=0

Y 1 =4x−7

Y 1 = 3x+5 4 Round your answer to the nearest thousandth.

x=−1.667y=0

## Extensions {#fs-id1932603}

Someone drove 10 mi directly east from their home, made a left turn at
an intersection, and then traveled 5 mi north to their place of work. If
a road was made directly from the home to the place of work, what would
its distance be to the nearest tenth of a mile?

If the road was made in the previous exercise, how much shorter would
the person's one-way trip be every day?

15−11.2=3.8mi shorter

Given these four points: A(1,3), B(--3,5), C(4,7), and D(5,--4) find the
coordinates of the midpoint of line segments AB ¯ and CD ¯ .

After finding the two midpoints in the previous exercise, find the
distance between the two midpoints to the nearest thousandth.

6.042

Given the graph of the rectangle shown and the coordinates of its
vertices, prove that the diagonals of the rectangle are of equal length.

In the previous exercise, find the coordinates of the midpoint for each
diagonal.

Midpoint of each diagonal is the same point (2,2). Note this is a
characteristic of rectangles, but not other quadrilaterals.

## Real-World Applications {#fs-id2454474}

The coordinates on a map for San Francisco are (53,17) and those for
Sacramento are (128,78). Note that coordinates represent miles. Find the
distance between the cities to the nearest mile.

If San Jose's coordinates are (76,--12), where the coordinates represent
miles, find the distance between San Jose and San Francisco to the
nearest mile.

37mi

A small craft in Lake Ontario sends out a distress signal. The
coordinates of the boat in trouble were (49,64) One rescue boat is at
the coordinates (60,82) and a second Coast Guard craft is at coordinates
(58,47). Assuming both rescue craft travel at the same rate, which one
would get to the distressed boat the fastest?

A person on the top of a building wants to have a guy wire extend to a
point on the ground 20 ft from the building. To the nearest foot, how
long will the wire have to be if the building is 50 ft tall?

54 ft

If we rent a truck and pay a \$75/day fee plus \$.20 for every mile we
travel, write a linear equation that would express the total cost per
day y, using x to represent the number of miles we travel. Graph this
function on your graphing calculator and find the total cost for one day
if we travel 70 mi.

# 

Cartesian coordinate system

a grid system designed with perpendicular axes invented by René
Descartes

distance formula

a formula that can be used to find the length of a line segment if the
endpoints are known

equation in two variables

a mathematical statement, typically written in

x

and

y

, in which two expressions are equal

graph in two variables

the graph of an equation in two variables, which is always shown in two
variables in the two-dimensional plane

intercepts

the points at which the graph of an equation crosses the

x

-axis and the

y

-axis

midpoint formula

a formula to find the point that divides a line segment into two parts
of equal length

ordered pair

a pair of numbers indicating horizontal displacement and vertical
displacement from the origin; also known as a coordinate pair,

(

x

,

y

)

origin

the point where the two axes cross in the center of the plane, described
by the ordered pair

(

0

,

0

)

quadrant

one quarter of the coordinate plane, created when the axes divide the
plane into four sections

x

-axis

the common name of the horizontal axis on a coordinate plane; a number
line increasing from left to right

x-

coordinate

the first coordinate of an ordered pair, representing the horizontal
displacement and direction from the origin

x-

intercept

the point where a graph intersects the

x-

axis; an ordered pair with a

y

-coordinate of zero

y

-axis

the common name of the vertical axis on a coordinate plane; a number
line increasing from bottom to top

y-

coordinate

the second coordinate of an ordered pair, representing the vertical
displacement and direction from the origin

y

-intercept

a point where a graph intercepts the

y-

axis; an ordered pair with an

x

-coordinate of zero
