m51253

> In this section, you will:
>
> Solve equations in one variable algebraically.
>
> Solve a rational equation.
>
> Find a linear equation.
>
> Given the equations of two lines, determine whether their graphs are
> parallel or perpendicular.
>
> Write the equation of a line parallel or perpendicular to a given
> line.

eb6fde5e-763a-412f-8aa4-866649f706d5

#  {#eip-952}

## Learning Objectives {#fs-idm352615264}

Simplify expressions using order of operations (IA 1.1.3)

Solve linear equations using a general strategy (IA 2.1.1)

## Objective 1: Simplify expressions using order of operations (IA 1.1.3) {#fs-idm629740800}

:::: {#fs-id1167836543296 .note}
::: title
Use the order of operations
:::

Parentheses and Other Grouping Symbols

Simplify all expressions inside the parentheses or other grouping
symbols, working on the innermost parentheses first.

Exponents

Simplify all expressions with exponents.

Multiplication and Division

Perform all multiplication and division in order from left to right.
These operations have equal priority.

Addition and Subtraction

Perform all addition and subtraction in order from left to right. These
operations have equal priority.
::::

::: {#eip-314 .example}
Simplify: 5+23+3\[6−3(4−2)\].

  ----------------------------------------------------------------------- --
                                                                          
  Are there any parentheses (or othergrouping symbols)? Yes.              
  Focus on the parentheses that are inside thebrackets. Subtract.         
  Continue inside the brackets and multiply.                              
  Continue inside the brackets and subtract.                              
  The expression inside the brackets requiresno further simplification.   
  Are there any exponents? Yes. Simplify exponents.                       
  Is there any multiplication or division? Yes.                           
  Multiply.                                                               
  Is there any addition of subtraction? Yes.                              
  Add.                                                                    
  Add.                                                                    
  ----------------------------------------------------------------------- --
:::

### Practice Makes Perfect {#eip-75}

3(1+9∙6)-42

23-12÷(9-5)

33÷3+4(7-2)

10+3\[6-2(4-2)\]-24

Evaluate the following expressions being sure to follow the order of
operations:

When x=3 , ⓐ x5 ⓑ 5x ⓒ 3x2-4x-8

When x=3,y=-2 6x2+3xy-9y2

When x=-8,y=3 (x+y)2

Simplify by combining like terms:

10a+7+5a-2+7a-4

5b+9b+10(2b+3b)+5

## Objective 2: Solve linear equations using a general strategy (IA 2.1.1) {#fs-idm228426624}

:::: {#fs-id1167846543196 .note}
::: title
Solve linear equations using a general strategy
:::

Simplify each side of the equation as much as possible. Use the
Distributive Property to remove any parentheses. Combine like terms.

Collect all the variable terms on one side of the equation. Use the
Addition or Subtraction Property of Equality.

Collect all the constant terms on the other side of the equation. Use
the Addition or Subtraction Property of Equality.

Make the coefficient of the variable term equal to 1. Use the
Multiplication or Division Property of Equality. State the solution to
the equation.

Check the solution. Substitute the solution into the original equation
to make sure the result is a true statement.
::::

::: {#eip-39 .example}
Solve linear equations using a general strategy.

2(w+5)+1=10+4w+2

  ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ---------------------------
  Use distributive property to remove parentheses:                                    2w+10+1=10+4w+2
  Combine like terms on each side:                                                    2w+11=12+4w
  Subtract 2w from each side to bring variables to one side:                          2w-2w+11=12+4w-2w
  Combine like terms:                                                                 11=12+2w
  Subtract 12 from each side to bring constants to one side:                          11-12=12-12+2w
  Combine like terms:                                                                 -1=2w
  Divide each side by 2 to isolate the variable terms:                                -12=2w2
  Simplify:                                                                           -12=w or w=-12
  To check your solution, replace w with -12 in the original equation and simplify:   2(w+5)+1=10+4w+2
                                                                                      2(-12+5)+1=10+4(-12)+2
                                                                                      2(92)+1=10+(-2)+2 9+1=8+2
  The solution checks, we reached a true statement.                                   10=10
  ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ---------------------------
:::

### Practice Makes Perfect {#eip-788}

Solve each linear equation using the general strategy.

15(y-9)=-60

-2(11-7x)+54=4

3(4n-1)-2=8n+3

12+2(5-3y)=-9(y-1)-2

14(20x+12)=x+7

22(3m-4)=8(2m+9)

3x+42+1=5x+108

0.05n+0.10(n+8)=2.15

Caroline is a full-time college student planning a spring break
vacation. To earn enough money for the trip, she has taken a part-time
job at the local bank that pays \$15.00/hr, and she opened a savings
account with an initial deposit of \$400 on January 15. She arranged for
direct deposit of her payroll checks. If spring break begins March 20
and the trip will cost approximately \$2,500, how many hours will she
have to work to earn enough to pay for her vacation? If she can only
work 4 hours per day, how many days per week will she have to work? How
many weeks will it take? In this section, we will investigate problems
like this and others, which generate graphs like the line in [\#](#).

<figure id="Figure_02_02_001">

</figure>

# Solving Linear Equations in One Variable {#fs-id2454936}

A linear equation is an equation of a straight line, written in one
variable. The only power of the variable is 1. Linear equations in one
variable may take the form ax+b=0 and are solved using basic algebraic
operations.

We begin by classifying linear equations in one variable as one of three
types: identity, conditional, or inconsistent. An identity equation is
true for all values of the variable. Here is an example of an identity
equation.

$$3x = 2x + x$$

The solution set consists of all values that make the equation true. For
this equation, the solution set is all real numbers because any real
number substituted for x will make the equation true.

A conditional equation is true for only some values of the variable. For
example, if we are to solve the equation 5x+2=3x−6, we have the
following:

$$\begin{array}{rcl}
{5x + 2} & = & {3x - 6} \\
{2x} & = & -8 \\
x & = & -4
\end{array}$$

The solution set consists of one number: { −4 }. It is the only solution
and, therefore, we have solved a conditional equation.

An inconsistent equation results in a false statement. For example, if
we are to solve 5x−15=5( x−4 ), we have the following:

$$\begin{array}{rclc}
{5x - 15} & = & {5x - 20} & \\
{5x - 15 - 5x} & = & {5x - 20 - 5x} & {\qquad\text{Subtract~}5x\mspace{9mu}\text{from~both~sides}.} \\
-15 & \neq & -20 & {\qquad\text{False~statement}}
\end{array}$$

Indeed, −15≠−20. There is no solution because this is an inconsistent
equation.

Solving linear equations in one variable involves the fundamental
properties of equality and basic algebraic operations. A brief review of
those operations follows.

:::: {#fs-id1549902 .note}
::: title
Linear Equation in One Variable
:::

A linear equation in one variable can be written in the form

$$ax + b = 0$$

where *a* and *b* are real numbers, a≠0.
::::

:::: {#fs-id1592386 .note}
::: title
:::

How To

*Given a linear equation in one variable, use algebra to solve it.*

The following steps are used to manipulate an equation and isolate the
unknown variable, so that the last line reads x=\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_, if
*x* is the unknown. There is no set order, as the steps used depend on
what is given:

We may add, subtract, multiply, or divide an equation by a number or an
expression as long as we do the same thing to both sides of the equal
sign. Note that we cannot divide by zero.

Apply the distributive property as needed:

a

(

b

\+

c

)

=

a

b

\+

a

c

.

Isolate the variable on one side of the equation.

When the variable is multiplied by a coefficient in the final stage,
multiply both sides of the equation by the reciprocal of the
coefficient.
::::

::: {#Example_02_02_01 .example}
Solve the following equation: 2x+7=19.

This equation can be written in the form ax+b=0 by subtracting 19 from
both sides. However, we may proceed to solve the equation in its
original form by performing algebraic operations.

$$\begin{array}{rclc}
{2x + 7} & = & 19 & \\
{2x} & = & 12 & {\qquad\text{Subtract~7~from~both~sides}\text{.}} \\
x & = & 6 & {\qquad\text{Multiply~both~sides~by~}\frac{1}{2}\mspace{9mu}\text{or~divide~by~2}\text{.}}
\end{array}$$

The solution is 6.
:::

:::: {#fs-id1531582 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Solve the linear equation in one variable: 2x+1=−9.

x=−5
::::

::: {#Example_02_02_02 .example}
Solve the following equation: 4( x−3 )+12=15−5( x+6 ).

Apply standard algebraic properties.

$$\begin{array}{cclc}
{4(x - 3) + 12} & = & {15 - 5(x + 6)} & \\
{4x - 12 + 12} & = & {15 - 5x - 30} & {\qquad\text{Apply~the~distributive~property}\text{.}} \\
{4x} & = & {-15 - 5x} & {\qquad\text{Combine~like~terms}.} \\
{9x} & = & -15 & {\qquad\text{Place~}x\text{-terms~on~one~side~and~simplify}.} \\
x & = & {- \frac{15}{9}} & {\qquad\text{Multiply~both~sides~by~}\frac{1}{9}\text{,~the~reciprocal~of~9}.} \\
x & = & {- \frac{5}{3}} & 
\end{array}$$

This problem requires the distributive property to be applied twice, and
then the properties of algebra are used to reach the final line, x=− 5 3
.
:::

:::: {#fs-id1533557 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Solve the equation in one variable: −2( 3x−1 )+x=14−x.

x=−3
::::

# Solving a Rational Equation {#fs-id1352666}

In this section, we look at rational equations that, after some
manipulation, result in a linear equation. If an equation contains at
least one rational expression, it is a considered a *rational equation*.

Recall that a rational number is the ratio of two numbers, such as 2 3
or 7 2 . A rational expression is the ratio, or quotient, of two
polynomials. Here are three examples.

$$\frac{x + 1}{x^{2} - 4},\mspace{9mu}\frac{1}{x - 3},\mspace{9mu}\text{or}\mspace{9mu}\frac{4}{x^{2} + x - 2}$$

Rational equations have a variable in the denominator in at least one of
the terms. Our goal is to perform algebraic operations so that the
variables appear in the numerator. In fact, we will eliminate all
denominators by multiplying both sides of the equation by the least
common denominator (LCD).

Finding the LCD is identifying an expression that contains the highest
power of all of the factors in all of the denominators. We do this
because when the equation is multiplied by the LCD, the common factors
in the LCD and in each denominator will equal one and will cancel out.

::: {#Example_02_02_03 .example}
Solve the rational equation: 7 2x − 5 3x = 22 3 .

We have three denominators; 2x,3x, and 3. The LCD must contain 2x,3x,
and 3. An LCD of 6x contains all three denominators. In other words,
each denominator can be divided evenly into the LCD. Next, multiply both
sides of the equation by the LCD 6x.

$$\begin{array}{rclc}
{(6x)\left( {\frac{7}{2x} - \frac{5}{3x}} \right)} & = & {\left( \frac{22}{3} \right)(6x)} & \\
{(6x)\left( \frac{7}{2x} \right) - (6x)\left( \frac{5}{3x} \right)} & = & {\left( \frac{22}{3} \right)(6x)} & {\qquad\text{Use~the~distributive~property}.} \\
{(\cancel{6x})\left( \frac{7}{\cancel{2x}} \right) - (\cancel{6x})\left( \frac{5}{\cancel{3x}} \right)} & = & {\left( \frac{22}{\cancel{3}} \right)(\cancel{6}x)} & {\qquad\text{Cancel~out~the~common~factors}.} \\
{3(7) - 2(5)} & = & {22(2x)} & {\qquad\text{Multiply~remaining~factors~by~each~numerator}.} \\
{21 - 10} & = & {44x} & \\
11 & = & {44x} & \\
\frac{11}{44} & = & x & \\
\frac{1}{4} & = & x & 
\end{array}$$
:::

A common mistake made when solving rational equations involves finding
the LCD when one of the denominators is a binomial---two terms added or
subtracted---such as ( x+1 ). Always consider a binomial as an
individual factor---the terms cannot be separated. For example, suppose
a problem has three terms and the denominators are x, x−1, and 3x−3.
First, factor all denominators. We then have x, (x−1), and 3(x−1) as the
denominators. (Note the parentheses placed around the second
denominator.) Only the last two denominators have a common factor of
(x−1). The x in the first denominator is separate from the x in the
(x−1) denominators. An effective way to remember this is to write
factored and binomial denominators in parentheses, and consider each
parentheses as a separate unit or a separate factor. The LCD in this
instance is found by multiplying together the x, one factor of ( x−1 ),
and the 3. Thus, the LCD is the following:

$$x\left( {x - 1} \right)3 = 3x\left( {x - 1} \right)$$

So, both sides of the equation would be multiplied by 3x( x−1 ). Leave
the LCD in factored form, as this makes it easier to see how each
denominator in the problem cancels out.

Another example is a problem with two denominators, such as x and x 2
+2x. Once the second denominator is factored as x 2 +2x=x( x+2 ), there
is a common factor of *x* in both denominators and the LCD is x( x+2 ).

Sometimes we have a rational equation in the form of a proportion; that
is, when one fraction equals another fraction and there are no other
terms in the equation.

$$\frac{a}{b} = \frac{c}{d}$$

We can use another method of solving the equation without finding the
LCD: cross-multiplication. We multiply terms by crossing over the equal
sign.

Multiply a( d ) and b( c ), which results in ad=bc.

Any solution that makes a denominator in the original expression equal
zero must be excluded from the possibilities.

:::: {#fs-id1931811 .note}
::: title
Rational Equations
:::

A rational equation contains at least one rational expression where the
variable appears in at least one of the denominators.
::::

:::: {#fs-id1147894 .note}
::: title
:::

How To

*Given a rational equation, solve it.*

Factor all denominators in the equation.

Find and exclude values that set each denominator equal to zero.

Find the LCD.

Multiply the whole equation by the LCD. If the LCD is correct, there
will be no denominators left.

Solve the remaining equation.

Make sure to check solutions back in the original equations to avoid a
solution producing zero in a denominator.
::::

::: {#Example_02_02_04 .example}
Solve the following rational equation:

$$\frac{2}{x} - \frac{3}{2} = \frac{7}{2x}$$

We have three denominators: x, 2, and 2x. No factoring is required. The
product of the first two denominators is equal to the third denominator,
so, the LCD is 2x. Only one value is excluded from a solution set, 0.
Next, multiply the whole equation (both sides of the equal sign) by 2x.

$$\begin{matrix}
{2x\left( {\frac{2}{x} - \frac{3}{2}} \right)} & = & {\left( \frac{7}{2x} \right)2x} & \\
{2\cancel{x}\left( \frac{2}{\cancel{x}} \right) - \cancel{2}x\left( \frac{3}{\cancel{2}} \right)} & = & {\left( \frac{7}{\cancel{2x}} \right)\cancel{2x}} & {\qquad\text{Distribute~}2x\text{.}} \\
{2(2) - 3x} & = & 7 & {\qquad\text{Denominators~cancel~out}.} \\
{4 - 3x} & = & 7 & \\
{-3x} & = & 3 & \\
x & = & -1 & \\
 & & {\text{or}\;\left\{ -1 \right\}} & 
\end{matrix}$$

The proposed solution is −1, which is not an excluded value, so the
solution set contains one number, −1, or { −1 } written in set notation.
:::

:::: {#fs-id1254485 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Solve the rational equation: 2 3x = 1 4 − 1 6x .

x= 10 3
::::

::: {#Example_02_02_05 .example}
Solve the following rational equation: 1 x = 1 10 − 3 4x .

First find the common denominator. The three denominators in factored
form are x,10=2⋅5, and 4x=2⋅2⋅x. The smallest expression that is
divisible by each one of the denominators is 20x. Only x=0 is an
excluded value. Multiply the whole equation by 20x.

$$\begin{array}{rcl}
{20x\left( \frac{1}{x} \right)} & = & {\left( {\frac{1}{10} - \frac{3}{4x}} \right)20x} \\
20 & = & {2x - 15} \\
35 & = & {2x} \\
\frac{35}{2} & = & x
\end{array}$$

The solution is 35 2 .
:::

:::: {#fs-id1844482 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Solve the rational equation: − 5 2x + 3 4x =− 7 4 .

x=1
::::

::: {#Example_02_02_06 .example}
Solve the following rational equations and state the excluded values:

ⓐ

3

x

−

6

=

5

x

ⓑ

x

x

−

3

=

5

x

−

3

−

1

2

ⓒ

x

x

−

2

=

5

x

−

2

−

1

2

ⓐ

The denominators x and x−6 have nothing in common. Therefore, the LCD is
the product x( x−6 ). However, for this problem, we can cross-multiply.

$$\begin{array}{rclc}
\frac{3}{x - 6} & = & \frac{5}{x} & \\
{3x} & = & {5(x - 6)} & {\qquad\text{Distribute}\text{.}} \\
{3x} & = & {5x - 30} & \\
{-2x} & = & -30 & \\
x & = & 15 & 
\end{array}$$

The solution is 15. The excluded values are 6 and 0.

ⓑ

The LCD is 2( x−3 ). Multiply both sides of the equation by 2( x−3 ).

$$\begin{array}{rcl}
{2(x - 3)\left( \frac{x}{x - 3} \right)} & = & {\left( {\frac{5}{x - 3} - \frac{1}{2}} \right)2(x - 3)} \\
\frac{2\cancel{(x - 3)}x}{\cancel{x - 3}} & = & {\frac{2\cancel{(x - 3)}5}{\cancel{x - 3}} - \frac{\cancel{2}(x - 3)}{\cancel{2}}} \\
{2x} & = & {10 - (x - 3)} \\
{2x} & = & {10 - x + 3} \\
{2x} & = & {13 - x} \\
{3x} & = & 13 \\
x & = & \frac{13}{3}
\end{array}$$

The solution is 13 3 . The excluded value is 3.

ⓒ

The least common denominator is 2( x−2 ). Multiply both sides of the
equation by 2( x−2 ).

$$\begin{array}{rcl}
{2(x - 2)\left( \frac{x}{x - 2} \right)} & = & {\left( {\frac{5}{x - 2} - \frac{1}{2}} \right)2(x - 2)} \\
{2x} & = & {10 - (x - 2)} \\
{2x} & = & {12 - x} \\
{3x} & = & 12 \\
x & = & 4
\end{array}$$

The solution is 4. The excluded value is 2.
:::

:::: {#fs-id1686117 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Solve −3 2x+1 = 4 3x+1 . State the excluded values.

x=− 7 17 . Excluded values are x=− 1 2 and x=− 1 3 .
::::

::: {#Example_02_02_07 .example}
Solve the rational equation after factoring the denominators: 2 x+1 − 1
x−1 = 2x x 2 −1 . State the excluded values.

We must factor the denominator x 2 −1. We recognize this as the
difference of squares, and factor it as ( x−1 )( x+1 ). Thus, the LCD
that contains each denominator is ( x−1 )( x+1 ). Multiply the whole
equation by the LCD, cancel out the denominators, and solve the
remaining equation.

$$\begin{array}{rcl}
{(x - 1)(x + 1)\left( {\frac{2}{x + 1} - \frac{1}{x - 1}} \right)} & = & {\left( \frac{2x}{(x - 1)(x + 1)} \right)(x - 1)(x + 1)} \\
{2(x - 1) - 1(x + 1)} & = & {2x} \\
{2x - 2 - x - 1} & = & {2x\qquad\text{Distribute~the~negative~sign}.} \\
{-3 - x} & = & 0 \\
-3 & = & x
\end{array}$$

The solution is −3. The excluded values are 1 and −1.
:::

:::: {#fs-id1475570 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Solve the rational equation: 2 x−2 + 1 x+1 = 1 x 2 −x−2 .

x= 1 3
::::

# Finding a Linear Equation {#fs-id2673660}

Perhaps the most familiar form of a linear equation is the
slope-intercept form, written as y=mx+b, where m=slope and
b=y-intercept. Let us begin with the slope.

## The Slope of a Line {#fs-id2737079}

The slope of a line refers to the ratio of the vertical change in *y*
over the horizontal change in *x* between any two points on a line. It
indicates the direction in which a line slants as well as its steepness.
Slope is sometimes described as rise over run.

$$m = \frac{y_{2} - y_{1}}{x_{2} - x_{1}}$$

If the slope is positive, the line slants upward to the right. If the
slope is negative, the line slants downward to the right. As the
absolute value of the slope increases, the line becomes steeper. Some
examples are shown in [\#](#). The lines indicate the following slopes:
m=−3, m=2, and m= 1 3 .

<figure id="Figure_02_02_002">

</figure>

:::: {#fs-id1467947 .note}
::: title
The Slope of a Line
:::

The slope of a line, *m*, represents the change in *y* over the change
in *x.* Given two points, ( x 1 , y 1 ) and ( x 2 , y 2 ), the following
formula determines the slope of a line containing these points:

$$m = \frac{y_{2} - y_{1}}{x_{2} - x_{1}}$$
::::

::: {#Example_02_02_08 .example}
Find the slope of a line that passes through the points ( 2,−1 ) and (
−5,3 ).

We substitute the *y-*values and the *x-*values into the formula.

$$\begin{array}{ccl}
m & = & \frac{3 - (-1)}{-5 - 2} \\
 & = & \frac{4}{-7} \\
 & = & {- \frac{4}{7}}
\end{array}$$

The slope is − 4 7 .

It does not matter which point is called ( x 1 , y 1 ) or ( x 2 , y 2 ).
As long as we are consistent with the order of the *y* terms and the
order of the *x* terms in the numerator and denominator, the calculation
will yield the same result.
:::

:::: {#fs-id1225501 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Find the slope of the line that passes through the points ( −2,6 ) and (
1,4 ).

m=− 2 3
::::

::: {#Example_02_02_09 .example}
Identify the slope and *y-*intercept, given the equation y=− 3 4 x−4.

As the line is in y=mx+b form, the given line has a slope of m=− 3 4 .
The *y-*intercept is b=−4.

The *y*-intercept is the point at which the line crosses the *y-*axis.
On the *y-*axis, x=0. We can always identify the *y-*intercept when the
line is in slope-intercept form, as it will always equal *b.* Or, just
substitute x=0 and solve for *y.*
:::

## The Point-Slope Formula {#fs-id1520430}

Given the slope and one point on a line, we can find the equation of the
line using the point-slope formula.

$$y - y_{1} = m\left( {x - x_{1}} \right)$$

This is an important formula, as it will be used in other areas of
college algebra and often in calculus to find the equation of a tangent
line. We need only one point and the slope of the line to use the
formula. After substituting the slope and the coordinates of one point
into the formula, we simplify it and write it in slope-intercept form.

:::: {#fs-id1401850 .note}
::: title
The Point-Slope Formula
:::

Given one point and the slope, the point-slope formula will lead to the
equation of a line:

$$y - y_{1} = m\left( {x - x_{1}} \right)$$
::::

::: {#Example_02_02_09a .example}
Write the equation of the line with slope m=−3 and passing through the
point ( 4,8 ). Write the final equation in slope-intercept form.

Using the point-slope formula, substitute −3 for *m* and the point ( 4,8
) for ( x 1 , y 1 ).

$$\begin{array}{rcl}
{y - y_{1}} & = & {m(x - x_{1})} \\
{y - 8} & = & {-3(x - 4)} \\
{y - 8} & = & {-3x + 12} \\
y & = & {-3x + 20}
\end{array}$$

Note that any point on the line can be used to find the equation. If
done correctly, the same final equation will be obtained.
:::

:::: {#fs-id1939337 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Given m=4, find the equation of the line in slope-intercept form passing
through the point ( 2,5 ).

y=4x−3
::::

::: {#Example_02_02_10 .example}
Find the equation of the line passing through the points ( 3,4 ) and (
0,−3 ). Write the final equation in slope-intercept form.

First, we calculate the slope using the slope formula and two points.

$$\begin{array}{ccl}
m & = & \frac{-3 - 4}{0 - 3} \\
 & = & \frac{- 7}{- 3} \\
 & = & \frac{7}{3}
\end{array}$$

Next, we use the point-slope formula with the slope of 7 3 , and either
point. Let's pick the point ( 3,4 ) for ( x 1 , y 1 ).

$$\begin{array}{rcl}
{y - 4} & = & {\frac{7}{3}(x - 3)} \\
{y - 4} & = & {\frac{7}{3}x - 7\qquad\text{Distribute~the~}\frac{7}{3}.} \\
y & = & {\frac{7}{3}x - 3}
\end{array}$$

In slope-intercept form, the equation is written as y= 7 3 x−3.

To prove that either point can be used, let us use the second point (
0,−3 ) and see if we get the same equation.

$$\begin{array}{rcl}
{y - ( - 3)} & = & {\frac{7}{3}(x - 0)} \\
{y + 3} & = & {\frac{7}{3}x} \\
y & = & {\frac{7}{3}x - 3}
\end{array}$$

We see that the same line will be obtained using either point. This
makes sense because we used both points to calculate the slope.
:::

## Standard Form of a Line {#fs-id2520904}

Another way that we can represent the equation of a line is in standard
form. Standard form is given as

$$Ax + By = C$$

where A, B, and C are integers. The *x-* and *y-*terms are on one side
of the equal sign and the constant term is on the other side.

::: {#Example_02_02_11 .example}
Find the equation of the line with m=−6 and passing through the point (
1 4 ,−2 ). Write the equation in standard form.

We begin using the point-slope formula.

$$\begin{array}{rcl}
{y - (-2)} & = & {-6\left( {x - \frac{1}{4}} \right)} \\
{y + 2} & = & {-6x + \frac{3}{2}}
\end{array}$$

From here, we multiply through by 2, as no fractions are permitted in
standard form, and then move both variables to the left aside of the
equal sign and move the constants to the right.

$$\begin{array}{rcl}
{2(y + 2)} & = & {\left( {-6x + \frac{3}{2}} \right)2} \\
{2y + 4} & = & {-12x + 3} \\
{12x + 2y} & = & -1
\end{array}$$

This equation is now written in standard form.
:::

:::: {#fs-id2426862 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Find the equation of the line in standard form with slope m=− 1 3 and
passing through the point ( 1, 1 3 ).

x+3y=2
::::

## Vertical and Horizontal Lines {#fs-id1548365}

The equations of vertical and horizontal lines do not require any of the
preceding formulas, although we can use the formulas to prove that the
equations are correct. The equation of a vertical line is given as

$$x = c$$

where *c* is a constant. The slope of a vertical line is undefined, and
regardless of the *y-*value of any point on the line, the *x-*coordinate
of the point will be *c*.

Suppose that we want to find the equation of a line containing the
following points: ( −3,−5 ),( −3,1 ),( −3,3 ), and ( −3,5 ). First, we
will find the slope.

$$m = \frac{5 - 3}{- 3 - (-3)} = \frac{2}{0}$$

Zero in the denominator means that the slope is undefined and,
therefore, we cannot use the point-slope formula. However, we can plot
the points. Notice that all of the *x-*coordinates are the same and we
find a vertical line through x=−3. See [\#](#)*.*

The equation of a horizontal line is given as

$$y = c$$

where *c* is a constant. The slope of a horizontal line is zero, and for
any *x-*value of a point on the line, the *y-*coordinate will be *c*.

Suppose we want to find the equation of a line that contains the
following set of points: ( −2,−2 ),( 0,−2 ),( 3,−2 ), and ( 5,−2 ). We
can use the point-slope formula. First, we find the slope using any two
points on the line.

$$\begin{array}{ccl}
m & = & \frac{-2 - (-2)}{0 - (-2)} \\
 & = & \frac{0}{2} \\
 & = & 0
\end{array}$$

Use any point for ( x 1 , y 1 ) in the formula, or use the
*y*-intercept.

$$\begin{array}{rcl}
{y - (-2)} & = & {0(x - 3)} \\
{y + 2} & = & 0 \\
y & = & -2
\end{array}$$

The graph is a horizontal line through y=−2. Notice that all of the
*y-*coordinates are the same. See [\#](#).

<figure id="Figure_02_02_003">

</figure>

::: {#Example_02_02_12 .example}
Find the equation of the line passing through the given points: ( 1,−3 )
and ( 1,4 ).

The *x-*coordinate of both points is 1. Therefore, we have a vertical
line, x=1.
:::

:::: {#fs-id1813611 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Find the equation of the line passing through ( −5,2 ) and ( 2,2 ).

Horizontal line: y=2
::::

# Determining Whether Graphs of Lines are Parallel or Perpendicular {#fs-id1495944}

Parallel lines have the same slope and different *y-*intercepts. Lines
that are parallel to each other will never intersect. For example,
[\#](#) shows the graphs of various lines with the same slope, m=2.

<figure id="Figure_02_02_004">

</figure>

All of the lines shown in the graph are parallel because they have the
same slope and different *y-*intercepts.

Lines that are perpendicular intersect to form a 90° -angle. The slope
of one line is the negative reciprocal of the other. We can show that
two lines are perpendicular if the product of the two slopes is −1: m 1
⋅ m 2 =−1. For example, [\#](#) shows the graph of two perpendicular
lines. One line has a slope of 3; the other line has a slope of − 1 3 .

$$\begin{array}{rcl}
{m_{1} \cdot m_{2}} & = & -1 \\
{3 \cdot \left( {- \frac{1}{3}} \right)} & = & -1
\end{array}$$

<figure id="Figure_02_02_005">

</figure>

::: {#Example_02_02_13 .example}
Graph the equations of the given lines, and state whether they are
parallel, perpendicular, or neither: 3y=−4x+3 and 3x−4y=8.

The first thing we want to do is rewrite the equations so that both
equations are in slope-intercept form.

First equation:

$$\begin{array}{rcl}
{3y} & = & {-4x + 3} \\
y & = & {- \frac{4}{3}x + 1}
\end{array}$$

Second equation:

$$\begin{array}{rcl}
{3x - 4y} & = & 8 \\
{-4y} & = & {\operatorname{}-3x + 8} \\
y & = & {\frac{3}{4}x - 2}
\end{array}$$

See the graph of both lines in [\#](#)

<figure id="Figure_02_02_006">

</figure>

From the graph, we can see that the lines appear perpendicular, but we
must compare the slopes.

$$\begin{array}{rcl}
m_{1} & = & {- \frac{4}{3}} \\
m_{2} & = & \frac{3}{4} \\
{m_{1} \cdot m_{2}} & = & {\left( {- \frac{4}{3}} \right)\left( \frac{3}{4} \right) = -1}
\end{array}$$

The slopes are negative reciprocals of each other, confirming that the
lines are perpendicular.
:::

:::: {#fs-id2514142 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Graph the two lines and determine whether they are parallel,
perpendicular, or neither: 2y−x=10 and 2y=x+4.

Parallel lines: equations are written in slope-intercept form.
::::

# Writing the Equations of Lines Parallel or Perpendicular to a Given Line {#fs-id1743214}

As we have learned, determining whether two lines are parallel or
perpendicular is a matter of finding the slopes. To write the equation
of a line parallel or perpendicular to another line, we follow the same
principles as we do for finding the equation of any line. After finding
the slope, use the point-slope formula to write the equation of the new
line.

:::: {#fs-id2640149 .note}
::: title
:::

How To

*Given an equation for a line, write the equation of a line parallel or
perpendicular to it.*

Find the slope of the given line. The easiest way to do this is to write
the equation in slope-intercept form.

Use the slope and the given point with the point-slope formula.

Simplify the line to slope-intercept form and compare the equation to
the given line.
::::

::: {#Example_02_02_14 .example}
Write the equation of line parallel to a 5x+3y=1 and passing through the
point ( 3,5 ).

First, we will write the equation in slope-intercept form to find the
slope.

$$\begin{array}{rcl}
{5x + 3y} & = & 1 \\
{3y} & = & {–5x + 1} \\
y & = & {- \frac{5}{3}x + \frac{1}{3}}
\end{array}$$

The slope is m=− 5 3 . The *y-*intercept is 1 3 , but that really does
not enter into our problem, as the only thing we need for two lines to
be parallel is the same slope. The one exception is that if the
*y-*intercepts are the same, then the two lines are the same line. The
next step is to use this slope and the given point with the point-slope
formula.

$$\begin{array}{rcl}
{y - 5} & = & {- \frac{5}{3}(x - 3)} \\
{y - 5} & = & {- \frac{5}{3}x + 5} \\
y & = & {- \frac{5}{3}x + 10}
\end{array}$$

The equation of the line is y=− 5 3 x+10. See [\#](#)*.*

<figure id="Figure_02_02_008">

</figure>
:::

:::: {#fs-id2959024 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Find the equation of the line parallel to 5x=7+y and passing through the
point ( −1,−2 ).

y=5x+3
::::

::: {#Example_02_02_15 .example}
Find the equation of the line perpendicular to 5x−3y+4=0 and passing
through the point ( −4,1 ).

The first step is to write the equation in slope-intercept form.

$$\begin{array}{rcl}
{5x - 3y + 4} & = & 0 \\
{-3y} & = & {-5x - 4} \\
y & = & {\frac{5}{3}x + \frac{4}{3}}
\end{array}$$

We see that the slope is m= 5 3 . This means that the slope of the line
perpendicular to the given line is the negative reciprocal, or − 3 5 .
Next, we use the point-slope formula with this new slope and the given
point.

$$\begin{array}{rcl}
{y - 1} & = & {- \frac{3}{5}\left( {x - (-4)} \right)} \\
{y - 1} & = & {- \frac{3}{5}x - \frac{12}{5}} \\
y & = & {- \frac{3}{5}x - \frac{12}{5} + \frac{5}{5}} \\
y & = & {- \frac{3}{5}x - \frac{7}{5}}
\end{array}$$
:::

:::: {#fs-id2308224 .note}
::: title
:::

Media

Access these online resources for additional instruction and practice
with linear equations.

Solving rational equations

Equation of a line given two points

Finding the equation of a line perpendicular to another line through a
given point

Finding the equation of a line parallel to another line through a given
point
::::

# Key Concepts {#fs-id1532358}

We can solve linear equations in one variable in the form

a

x

\+

b

=

0

using standard algebraic properties. See

and

.

A rational expression is a quotient of two polynomials. We use the LCD
to clear the fractions from an equation. See

and

.

All solutions to a rational equation should be verified within the
original equation to avoid an undefined term, or zero in the
denominator. See

and

and

.

Given two points, we can find the slope of a line using the slope
formula. See

.

We can identify the slope and

y

-intercept of an equation in slope-intercept form. See

.

We can find the equation of a line given the slope and a point. See

.

We can also find the equation of a line given two points. Find the slope
and use the point-slope formula. See

.

The standard form of a line has no fractions. See

.

Horizontal lines have a slope of zero and are defined as

y

=

c

,

where

c

is a constant.

Vertical lines have an undefined slope (zero in the denominator), and
are defined as

x

=

c

,

where

c

is a constant. See

.

Parallel lines have the same slope and different

y-

intercepts. See

and

.

Perpendicular lines have slopes that are negative reciprocals of each
other unless one is horizontal and the other is vertical. See

.

# Section Exercises {#fs-id3264330}

## Verbal {#fs-id2508880}

What does it mean when we say that two lines are parallel?

It means they have the same slope.

What is the relationship between the slopes of perpendicular lines
(assuming neither is horizontal nor vertical)?

How do we recognize when an equation, for example y=4x+3, will be a
straight line (linear) when graphed?

The exponent of the x variable is 1. It is called a first-degree
equation.

What does it mean when we say that a linear equation is inconsistent?

When solving the following equation:

2 x−5 = 4 x+1

explain why we must exclude x=5 and x=−1 as possible solutions from the
solution set.

If we insert either value into the equation, they make an expression in
the equation undefined (zero in the denominator).

## Algebraic {#fs-id2497234}

For the following exercises, solve the equation for x.

7x+2=3x−9

4x−3=5

x=2

3(x+2)−12=5(x+1)

12−5(x+3)=2x−5

x= 2 7

1 2 − 1 3 x= 4 3

x 3 − 3 4 = 2x+3 12

x=6

2 3 x+ 1 2 = 31 6

3(2x−1)+x=5x+3

x=3

2x 3 − 3 4 = x 6 + 21 4

x+2 4 − x−1 3 =2

x=−14

For the following exercises, solve each rational equation for x. State
all *x*-values that are excluded from the solution set.

3 x − 1 3 = 1 6

2− 3 x+4 = x+2 x+4

x≠−4; x=−3

3 x−2 = 1 x−1 + 7 (x−1)(x−2)

3x x−1 +2= 3 x−1

x≠1; when we solve this we get x=1, which is excluded, therefore NO
solution

5 x+1 + 1 x−3 = −6 x 2 −2x−3

1 x = 1 5 + 3 2x

x≠0; x=− 5 2

For the following exercises, find the equation of the line using the
point-slope formula. Write all the final equations using the
slope-intercept form.

( 0,3 ) with a slope of 2 3

( 1,2 ) with a slope of − 4 5

y=− 4 5 x+ 14 5

*x*-intercept is 1, and ( −2,6 )

*y*-intercept is 2, and ( 4,−1 )

y=− 3 4 x+2

(−3,10) and (5,−6)

( 1,3 ) and  ( 5,5 )

y= 1 2 x+ 5 2

parallel to y=2x+5 and passes through the point ( 4,3 )

perpendicular to 3y=x−4 and passes through the point ( −2,1 ) .

y=−3x−5

For the following exercises, find the equation of the line using the
given information.

( −2,0 ) and ( −2,5 )

( 1,7 ) and ( 3,7 )

y=7

The slope is undefined and it passes through the point ( 2,3 ).

The slope equals zero and it passes through the point ( 1,−4 ).

y=−4

The slope is 3 4 and it passes through the point (1,4).

(--1,3) and (4,--5)

8x+5y=7

## Graphical {#fs-id768131}

For the following exercises, graph the pair of equations on the same
axes, and state whether they are parallel, perpendicular, or neither.

y=2x+7 y=− 1 2 x−4

3x−2y=5 6y−9x=6

Parallel

y= 3x+1 4 y=3x+2

x=4 y=−3

Perpendicular

## Numeric {#fs-id1700245}

For the following exercises, find the slope of the line that passes
through the given points.

( 5,4 ) and ( 7,9 )

( −3,2 ) and ( 4,−7 )

m=− 9 7

( −5,4 ) and ( 2,4 )

( −1,−2 ) and ( 3,4 )

m= 3 2

( 3,3 ) and ( 3,−2 )

For the following exercises, find the slope of the lines that pass
through each pair of points and determine whether the lines are parallel
or perpendicular.

( −1,3 ) and  ( 5,1 ) ( −2,3 ) and  ( 0,9 )

m 1 =− 1 3 ,  m 2 =3; Perpendicular.

( 2,5 ) and  ( 5,9 ) ( −1,−1 ) and  ( 2,3 )

## Technology {#fs-id2431191}

For the following exercises, express the equations in slope intercept
form (rounding each number to the thousandths place). Enter this into a
graphing calculator as Y1, then adjust the ymin and ymax values for your
window to include where the *y*-intercept occurs. State your ymin and
ymax values.

0.537x−2.19y=100

y=0.245x−45.662. Answers may vary. y min =−50, y max =−40

4,500x−200y=9,528

200−30y x =70

y=−2.333x+6.667. Answers may vary. y min =−10,  y max =10

## Extensions {#fs-id2294054}

Starting with the point-slope formula y−y1=m(x−x1), solve this
expression for x in terms of x1,y,y1, and m.

Starting with the standard form of an equation Ax+By=C solve this
expression for y in terms of A,B,C and x. Then put the expression in
slope-intercept form.

y=− A B x+ C B

Use the above derived formula to put the following standard equation in
slope intercept form: 7x−5y=25.

Given that the following coordinates are the vertices of a rectangle,
prove that this truly is a rectangle by showing the slopes of the sides
that meet are perpendicular.

(--1,1),(2,0),(3,3) and (0,4)

The slope for (−1,1)to (0,4)is 3. The slope for (−1,1)to (2,0)is  −1 3 .
The slope for (2,0)to (3,3)is 3. The slope for (0,4)to (3,3)is  −1 3 .

Yes they are perpendicular.

Find the slopes of the diagonals in the previous exercise. Are they
perpendicular?

## Real-World Applications {#fs-id1570540}

The slope for a wheelchair ramp for a home has to be 1 12 . If the
vertical distance from the ground to the door bottom is 2.5 ft, find the
distance the ramp has to extend from the home in order to comply with
the needed slope.

30 ft

If the profit equation for a small business selling x number of item one
and y number of item two is p=3x+4y, find the y value when
p=\$453and  x=75.

For the following exercises, use this scenario: The cost of renting a
car is \$45/wk plus \$0.25/mi traveled during that week. An equation to
represent the cost would be y=45+.25x, where x is the number of miles
traveled.

What is your cost if you travel 50 mi?

\$57.50

If your cost were \$63.75, how many miles were you charged for
traveling?

Suppose you have a maximum of \$100 to spend for the car rental. What
would be the maximum number of miles you could travel?

220 mi

# 

conditional equation

an equation that is true for some values of the variable

identity equation

an equation that is true for all values of the variable

inconsistent equation

an equation producing a false result

linear equation

an algebraic equation in which each term is either a constant or the
product of a constant and the first power of a variable

solution set

the set of all solutions to an equation

slope

the change in

y-

values over the change in

x-

values

rational equation

an equation consisting of a fraction of polynomials
