m51254

> In this section, you will:
>
> Set up a linear equation to solve a real-world application.
>
> Use a formula to solve a real-world application.

c49b7453-abd1-49ed-bc12-baac08df9ebc

#  {#eip-845}

## Learning Objectives {#eip-912}

Solve a formula for a specified variable (IA 2.3.1)

Use a problem-solving strategy for word problems (IA 2.2.1)

## Objective 1: Solve a formula for a specified variable (IA 2.3.1) {#eip-825}

:::: {#fs-id1592386 .note}
::: title
Solving a Formula for a Specified Variable.
:::

Refer to the appropriate formula and identify the variable you are
solving for. Treat the other variable terms as if they were numbers.

Bring all terms containing the specified variable to one side using the
addition/subtraction property of equality.

Isolate the variable you are solving for using the
multiplication/division property of equality.
::::

:::: {#eip-264 .example}
::: title
Solve a Formula for a Specific Variable
:::

The formula for the perimeter of a rectangle is found using the formula:
P=2l+2w . Solve this formula in terms of *l*.

  --------------- ------------------------------------------------------
  P=2l+2w         Since we are solving for *l* we isolate the *l* term
  P-2w=2l+2w-2w   Subtract 2*w* from both sides.
  P-2w=2l         Combine like terms
  P-2w2=2l2       Divide by 2 to isolate *l*.
  P-2w2=l         Simplify
  --------------- ------------------------------------------------------
::::

### Practice Makes Perfect {#eip-344}

Solve each formula for the specific variable.

Solve for b P=a+b+c

Solve for s P=4s

Solve for r C=2πr

Solve for b A=12bh

Solve for W P=2L+2W

Solve for m y=mx+b

Solve for h A=2πh+2πr2

Solve for r A=πr2

Solve for s V=13s2h

Solve for L A=2LW+2HW+2LH

## Objective 2: Use a problem-solving strategy for word problems (IA 2.2.1) {#eip-841}

:::: {#eip-246 .note}
::: title
Use a Problem-Solving Strategy for word problems.
:::

Read

the problem. Make sure all the words and ideas are understood.

Identify

what you are looking for.

Name

what you are looking for. Choose a variable to represent that quantity.

Translate

into an equation. It may be helpful to restate the problem in one
sentence with all the important information. Then, translate the English
sentence into an algebra equation.

Solve

the equation using proper algebra techniques.

Check

the answer in the problem to make sure it makes sense.

Answer

the question with a complete sentence.
::::

::: {#eip-810 .example}
Hang borrowed \$7,500 from her parents to pay her tuition. In five
years, she paid them \$1,500 interest in addition to the \$7,500 she
borrowed. What was the rate of simple interest?

  --------------------------------------------------------------- -----------------
  Write down the given information:                               I = \$1500
                                                                  P = \$7500
                                                                  *r* = ?
                                                                  t = 5 years
  Identify the unknown: let interest rate be represented by *r*   
  Write a formula:                                                I=Prt
  Substitute in the given information:                            1500=(7500)r(5)
  Solve for *r*                                                   1500=37,500r
                                                                  150037,500=r
                                                                  0.04=r
                                                                  4%=r
  --------------------------------------------------------------- -----------------
:::

### Practice Makes Perfect {#eip-677}

Use a Problem-Solving Strategy for word problems.

The formula for area of a trapezoid is A=12(B+b)h where B is the length
of the base, b is the length of the other base and h is the height of
the trapezoid. If B=10cm , b=8cm and A=45cm2 , find the height of the
trapezoid.

A married couple together earns \$110,000 a year. The wife earns
\$16,000 less than twice what her husband earns. What does the husband
earn?

The label on Audrey's yogurt said that one serving provided 12 grams of
protein, which is 24% of the recommended daily amount. What is the total
recommended daily amount of protein?

Recently, the California governor proposed raising community college
fees from \$36 a unit to \$46 a unit. Find the percent change. (Round to
the nearest tenth of a percent.)

Sean's new car loan statement said he would pay \$4,866.25 in interest
from a simple interest rate of 8.5% over five years. How much did he
borrow to buy his new car?

At the campus coffee cart, a medium coffee costs \$1.65. MaryAnne brings
\$2.00 with her when she buys a cup of coffee and leaves the change as a
tip. What percent tip does she leave?

<figure id="Figure_02_03_001">

</figure>

Neka is hoping to get an A in his college algebra class. He has scores
of 75, 82, 95, 91, and 94 on his first five tests. Only the final exam
remains, and the maximum number of points that can be earned is 100. Is
it possible for Neka to end the course with an A? A simple linear
equation will give Neka his answer.

Many real-world applications can be modeled by linear equations. For
example, a cell phone package may include a monthly service fee plus a
charge per minute of talk-time; it costs a widget manufacturer a certain
amount to produce *x* widgets per month plus monthly operating charges;
a car rental company charges a daily fee plus an amount per mile driven.
These are examples of applications we come across every day that are
modeled by linear equations. In this section, we will set up and use
linear equations to solve such problems.

# Setting up a Linear Equation to Solve a Real-World Application {#fs-id1340190}

To set up or model a linear equation to fit a real-world application, we
must first determine the known quantities and define the unknown
quantity as a variable. Then, we begin to interpret the words as
mathematical expressions using mathematical symbols. Let us use the car
rental example above. In this case, a known cost, such as \$0.10/mi, is
multiplied by an unknown quantity, the number of miles driven.
Therefore, we can write 0.10x. This expression represents a variable
cost because it changes according to the number of miles driven.

If a quantity is independent of a variable, we usually just add or
subtract it, according to the problem. As these amounts do not change,
we call them fixed costs. Consider a car rental agency that charges
\$0.10/mi plus a daily fee of \$50. We can use these quantities to model
an equation that can be used to find the daily car rental cost C.

$$C = 0.10x + 50$$

When dealing with real-world applications, there are certain expressions
that we can translate directly into math. [\#](#) lists some common
verbal expressions and their equivalent mathematical expressions.

  Verbal                                                                       Translation to Math Operations
  ---------------------------------------------------------------------------- --------------------------------
  One number exceeds another by *a*                                            x,x+a
  Twice a number                                                               2x
  One number is *a* more than another number                                   x,x+a
  One number is *a* less than twice another number                             x,2x−a
  The product of a number and *a*, decreased by *b*                            ax−b
  The quotient of a number and the number plus *a* is three times the number   x x+a =3x
  The product of three times a number and the number decreased by *b* is *c*   3x( x−b )=c

:::: {#fs-id1297059 .note}
::: title
:::

How To

*Given a real-world problem, model a linear equation to fit it.*

Identify known quantities.

Assign a variable to represent the unknown quantity.

If there is more than one unknown quantity, find a way to write the
second unknown in terms of the first.

Write an equation interpreting the words as mathematical operations.

Solve the equation. Be sure the solution can be explained in words,
including the units of measure.
::::

::: {#Example_02_03_01 .example}
Find a linear equation to solve for the following unknown quantities:
One number exceeds another number by 17 and their sum is 31. Find the
two numbers.

Let x equal the first number. Then, as the second number exceeds the
first by 17, we can write the second number as x+17. The sum of the two
numbers is 31. We usually interpret the word *is* as an equal sign.

$$\begin{array}{ccl}
{x + (x + 17)} & = & 31 \\
{2x + 17} & = & {31\qquad\text{Simplify~and~solve}\text{.}} \\
{2x} & = & 14 \\
x & = & 7 \\
{x + 17} & = & {7 + 17} \\
 & = & 24
\end{array}$$

The two numbers are 7 and 24.
:::

:::: {#fs-id2503906 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Find a linear equation to solve for the following unknown quantities:
One number is three more than twice another number. If the sum of the
two numbers is 36, find the numbers.

11 and 25
::::

::: {#Example_02_03_02 .example}
There are two cell phone companies that offer different packages.
Company A charges a monthly service fee of \$34 plus \$.05/min
talk-time. Company B charges a monthly service fee of \$40 plus
\$.04/min talk-time.

ⓐ

Write a linear equation that models the packages offered by both
companies.

ⓑ

If the average number of minutes used each month is 1,160, which company
offers the better plan?

ⓒ

If the average number of minutes used each month is 420, which company
offers the better plan?

ⓓ

How many minutes of talk-time would yield equal monthly statements from
both companies?

ⓐ

The model for Company

A

can be written as

A

=

0.05

x

\+

34\.

This includes the variable cost of

0.05

x

plus the monthly service charge of \$34. Company

B

's package charges a higher monthly fee of \$40, but a lower variable
cost of

0.04

x

.

Company

B

's model can be written as

B

=

0.04

x

\+

\$

40\.

ⓑ

If the average number of minutes used each month is 1,160, we have the
following:

$$\begin{array}{ccl}
{\text{Company~}A} & = & {0.05(1,160) + 34} \\
 & = & {58 + 34} \\
 & = & 92 \\
{\text{Company~}B} & = & {0.04(1,160) + 40} \\
 & = & {46.4 + 40} \\
 & = & 86.4
\end{array}$$

So, Company *B* offers the lower monthly cost of \$86.40 as compared
with the \$92 monthly cost offered by Company *A* when the average
number of minutes used each month is 1,160.

ⓒ

If the average number of minutes used each month is 420, we have the
following:

$$\begin{array}{ccl}
{\text{Company~}A} & = & {0.05(420) + 34} \\
 & = & {21 + 34} \\
 & = & 55 \\
{\text{Company~}B} & = & {0.04(420) + 40} \\
 & = & {16.8 + 40} \\
 & = & 56.8
\end{array}$$

If the average number of minutes used each month is 420, then Company
*A* offers a lower monthly cost of \$55 compared to Company *B*'s
monthly cost of \$56.80.

ⓓ

To answer the question of how many talk-time minutes would yield the
same bill from both companies, we should think about the problem in
terms of ( x,y ) coordinates: At what point are both the *x-*value and
the *y-*value equal? We can find this point by setting the equations
equal to each other and solving for *x.*

$$\begin{array}{rcl}
{0.05x + 34} & = & {0.04x + 40} \\
{0.01x} & = & 6 \\
x & = & 600
\end{array}$$

Check the *x-*value in each equation.

$$\begin{array}{rcl}
{0.05(600) + 34} & = & 64 \\
{0.04(600) + 40} & = & 64
\end{array}$$

Therefore, a monthly average of 600 talk-time minutes renders the plans
equal. See [\#](#)

<figure id="Figure_02_03_002">

</figure>
:::

:::: {#fs-id2516836 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Find a linear equation to model this real-world application: It costs
ABC electronics company \$2.50 per unit to produce a part used in a
popular brand of desktop computers. The company has monthly operating
expenses of \$350 for utilities and \$3,300 for salaries. What are the
company's monthly expenses?

C=2.5x+3,650
::::

# Using a Formula to Solve a Real-World Application {#fs-id2834156}

Many applications are solved using known formulas. The problem is
stated, a formula is identified, the known quantities are substituted
into the formula, the equation is solved for the unknown, and the
problem's question is answered. Typically, these problems involve two
equations representing two trips, two investments, two areas, and so on.
Examples of formulas include the area of a rectangular region, A=LW; the
perimeter of a rectangle, P=2L+2W; and the volume of a rectangular
solid, V=LWH. When there are two unknowns, we find a way to write one in
terms of the other because we can solve for only one variable at a time.

::: {#Example_02_03_03 .example}
It takes Andrew 30 min to drive to work in the morning. He drives home
using the same route, but it takes 10 min longer, and he averages 10
mi/h less than in the morning. How far does Andrew drive to work?

This is a distance problem, so we can use the formula d=rt, where
distance equals rate multiplied by time. Note that when rate is given in
mi/h, time must be expressed in hours. Consistent units of measurement
are key to obtaining a correct solution.

First, we identify the known and unknown quantities. Andrew's morning
drive to work takes 30 min, or 1 2 h at rate r. His drive home takes 40
min, or 2 3 h, and his speed averages 10 mi/h less than the morning
drive. Both trips cover distance d. A table, such as [\#](#), is often
helpful for keeping track of information in these types of problems.

              d   r      t
  ----------- --- ------ -----
  *To Work*   d   r      1 2
  *To Home*   d   r−10   2 3

Write two equations, one for each trip.

$$\begin{array}{rcll}
d & = & {r\left( \frac{1}{2} \right)} & {\qquad\text{To~work}} \\
d & = & {(r - 10)\left( \frac{2}{3} \right)} & {\qquad\text{To~home}}
\end{array}$$

As both equations equal the same distance, we set them equal to each
other and solve for *r*.

$$\begin{array}{rcl}
{r\left( \frac{1}{2} \right)} & = & {(r - 10)\left( \frac{2}{3} \right)} \\
{\frac{1}{2}r} & = & {\frac{2}{3}r - \frac{20}{3}} \\
{\frac{1}{2}r - \frac{2}{3}r} & = & {- \frac{20}{3}} \\
{- \frac{1}{6}r} & = & {- \frac{20}{3}} \\
r & = & {- \frac{20}{3}(-6)} \\
r & = & 40
\end{array}$$

We have solved for the rate of speed to work, 40 mph. Substituting 40
into the rate on the return trip yields 30 mi/h. Now we can answer the
question. Substitute the rate back into either equation and solve for
*d.*

$$\begin{array}{ccl}
d & = & {40\left( \frac{1}{2} \right)} \\
 & = & 20
\end{array}$$

The distance between home and work is 20 mi.

Note that we could have cleared the fractions in the equation by
multiplying both sides of the equation by the LCD to solve for r.

$$\begin{array}{rcl}
{r\left( \frac{1}{2} \right)} & = & {(r - 10)\left( \frac{2}{3} \right)} \\
{6\mspace{9mu} \times \mspace{9mu} r\left( \frac{1}{2} \right)} & = & {6\mspace{9mu} \times \mspace{9mu}(r - 10)\left( \frac{2}{3} \right)} \\
{3r} & = & {4(r - 10)} \\
{3r} & = & {4r - 40} \\
{- r} & = & -40 \\
r & = & 40
\end{array}$$
:::

:::: {#fs-id1513518 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

On Saturday morning, it took Jennifer 3.6 h to drive to her mother's
house for the weekend. On Sunday evening, due to heavy traffic, it took
Jennifer 4 h to return home. Her speed was 5 mi/h slower on Sunday than
on Saturday. What was her speed on Sunday?

45 mi/h
::::

::: {#Example_02_03_04 .example}
The perimeter of a rectangular outdoor patio is 54 ft. The length is 3
ft greater than the width. What are the dimensions of the patio?

The perimeter formula is standard: P=2L+2W. We have two unknown
quantities, length and width. However, we can write the length in terms
of the width as L=W+3. Substitute the perimeter value and the expression
for length into the formula. It is often helpful to make a sketch and
label the sides as in [\#](#).

<figure id="Figure_02_03_003">

</figure>

Now we can solve for the width and then calculate the length.

$$\begin{array}{rcl}
P & = & {2L + 2W} \\
54 & = & {2(W + 3) + 2W} \\
54 & = & {2W + 6 + 2W} \\
54 & = & {4W + 6} \\
48 & = & {4W} \\
12 & = & W \\
{(12 + 3)} & = & L \\
15 & = & L
\end{array}$$

The dimensions are L=15 ft and W=12 ft.
:::

:::: {#fs-id1569239 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Find the dimensions of a rectangle given that the perimeter is 110 cm
and the length is 1 cm more than twice the width.

L=37 cm, W=18 cm
::::

::: {#Example_02_03_05 .example}
The perimeter of a tablet of graph paper is 48 in. The length is 6 in.
more than the width. Find the area of the graph paper.

The standard formula for area is A=LW; however, we will solve the
problem using the perimeter formula. The reason we use the perimeter
formula is because we know enough information about the perimeter that
the formula will allow us to solve for one of the unknowns. As both
perimeter and area use length and width as dimensions, they are often
used together to solve a problem such as this one.

We know that the length is 6 in. more than the width, so we can write
length as L=W+6. Substitute the value of the perimeter and the
expression for length into the perimeter formula and find the length.

$$\begin{array}{rcl}
P & = & {2L + 2W} \\
48 & = & {2(W + 6) + 2W} \\
48 & = & {2W + 12 + 2W} \\
48 & = & {4W + 12} \\
36 & = & {4W} \\
9 & = & W \\
{(9 + 6)} & = & L \\
15 & = & L
\end{array}$$

Now, we find the area given the dimensions of L=15 in. and W=9 in.

$$\begin{matrix}
A & = & {LW} \\
A & = & {15(9)} \\
 & = & {135\mspace{9mu}\text{in}\text{.}^{2}}
\end{matrix}$$

The area is 135 in.2.
:::

:::: {#fs-id1690882 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

A game room has a perimeter of 70 ft. The length is five more than twice
the width. How many ft2 of new carpeting should be ordered?

250 ft2
::::

::: {#Example_02_03_06 .example}
Find the dimensions of a shipping box given that the length is twice the
width, the height is 8 inches, and the volume is 1,600 in.3.

The formula for the volume of a box is given as V=LWH, the product of
length, width, and height. We are given that L=2W, and H=8. The volume
is 1,600 cubic inches.

$$\begin{array}{rcl}
V & = & {LWH} \\
{1,600} & = & {(2W)W(8)} \\
{1,600} & = & {16W^{2}} \\
100 & = & W^{2} \\
10 & = & W
\end{array}$$

The dimensions are L=20 in., W=10 in., and H=8 in.

Note that the square root of W 2 would result in a positive and a
negative value. However, because we are describing width, we can use
only the positive result.
:::

:::: {#fs-id1757303 .note}
::: title
:::

Media

Access these online resources for additional instruction and practice
with models and applications of linear equations.

Problem solving using linear equations

Problem solving using equations

Finding the dimensions of area given the perimeter

Find the distance between the cities using the distance = rate \* time
formula

Linear equation application (Write a cost equation)
::::

# Key Concepts {#fs-id1387691}

A linear equation can be used to solve for an unknown in a number
problem. See

.

Applications can be written as mathematical problems by identifying
known quantities and assigning a variable to unknown quantities. See

.

There are many known formulas that can be used to solve applications.
Distance problems, for example, are solved using the

d

=

r

t

formula. See

.

Many geometry problems are solved using the perimeter formula

P

=

2

L

\+

2

W

,

the area formula

A

=

L

W

,

or the volume formula

V

=

L

W

H

.

See

,

, and

.

# Section Exercises {#fs-id1831350}

## Verbal {#fs-id2863297}

To set up a model linear equation to fit real-world applications, what
should always be the first step?

Answers may vary. Possible answers: We should define in words what our
variable is representing. We should declare the variable. A heading.

Use your own words to describe this equation where *n* is a number:
5(n+3)=2n

If the total amount of money you had to invest was \$2,000 and you
deposit x amount in one investment, how can you represent the remaining
amount?

2,000−x

If a carpenter sawed a 10-ft board into two sections and one section was
n ft long, how long would the other section be in terms of n ?

If Bill was traveling v mi/h, how would you represent Daemon's speed if
he was traveling 10 mi/h faster?

v+10

## Real-World Applications {#fs-id2434530}

For the following exercises, use the information to find a linear
algebraic equation model to use to answer the question being asked.

Mark and Don are planning to sell each of their marble collections at a
garage sale. If Don has 1 more than 3 times the number of marbles Mark
has, how many does each boy have to sell if the total number of marbles
is 113?

Beth and Ann are joking that their combined ages equal Sam's age. If
Beth is twice Ann's age and Sam is 69 yr old, what are Beth and Ann's
ages?

Ann: 23; Beth: 46

Ruden originally filled out 8 more applications than Hanh. Then each boy
filled out 3 additional applications, bringing the total to 28. How many
applications did each boy originally fill out?

For the following exercises, use this scenario: Two different telephone
carriers offer the following plans that a person is considering. Company
A has a monthly fee of \$20 and charges of \$.05/min for calls. Company
B has a monthly fee of \$5 and charges \$.10/min for calls.

Find the model of the total cost of Company A's plan, using m for the
minutes.

20+0.05m

Find the model of the total cost of Company B's plan, using m for the
minutes.

Find out how many minutes of calling would make the two plans equal.

300 min

If the person makes a monthly average of 200 min of calls, which plan
should for the person choose?

For the following exercises, use this scenario: A wireless carrier
offers the following plans that a person is considering. The Family
Plan: \$90 monthly fee, unlimited talk and text on up to 8 lines, and
data charges of \$40 for each device for up to 2 GB of data per device.
The Mobile Share Plan: \$120 monthly fee for up to 10 devices, unlimited
talk and text for all the lines, and data charges of \$35 for each
device up to a shared total of 10 GB of data. Use P for the number of
devices that need data plans as part of their cost.

Find the model of the total cost of the Family Plan.

90+40P

Find the model of the total cost of the Mobile Share Plan.

Assuming they stay under their data limit, find the number of devices
that would make the two plans equal in cost.

6 devices

If a family has 3 smart phones, which plan should they choose?

For exercises 17 and 18, use this scenario: A retired woman has \$50,000
to invest but needs to make \$6,000 a year from the interest to meet
certain living expenses. One bond investment pays 15% annual interest.
The rest of it she wants to put in a CD that pays 7%.

If we let x be the amount the woman invests in the 15% bond, how much
will she be able to invest in the CD?

50,000−x

Set up and solve the equation for how much the woman should invest in
each option to sustain a \$6,000 annual return.

Two planes fly in opposite directions. One travels 450 mi/h and the
other 550 mi/h. How long will it take before they are 4,000 mi apart?

4 h

Ben starts walking along a path at 4 mi/h. One and a half hours after
Ben leaves, his sister Amanda begins jogging along the same path at 6
mi/h. How long will it be before Amanda catches up to Ben?

Fiora starts riding her bike at 20 mi/h. After a while, she slows down
to 12 mi/h, and maintains that speed for the rest of the trip. The whole
trip of 70 mi takes her 4.5 h. For what distance did she travel at 20
mi/h?

She traveled for 2 h at 20 mi/h, or 40 miles.

A chemistry teacher needs to mix a 30% salt solution with a 70% salt
solution to make 20 qt of a 40% salt solution. How many quarts of each
solution should the teacher mix to get the desired result?

Raúl has \$20,000 to invest. His intent is to earn 11% interest on his
investment. He can invest part of his money at 8% interest and part at
12% interest. How much does Raúl need to invest in each option to make
get a total 11% return on his \$20,000?

\$5,000 at 8% and \$15,000 at 12%

For the following exercises, use this scenario: A truck rental agency
offers two kinds of plans. Plan A charges \$75/wk plus \$.10/mi driven.
Plan B charges \$100/wk plus \$.05/mi driven.

Write the model equation for the cost of renting a truck with plan A.

Write the model equation for the cost of renting a truck with plan B.

B=100+.05x

Find the number of miles that would generate the same cost for both
plans.

If Tim knows he has to travel 300 mi, which plan should he choose?

Plan A

For the following exercises, use the formula given to solve for the
required value.

A=P(1+rt) is used to find the principal amount *P* deposited, earning
*r*% interest, for *t* years. Use this to find what principal amount *P*
David invested at a 3% rate for 20 yr if A=\$8,000.

The formula F= m v 2 R relates force (F), velocity (v), mass , and
resistance (m). Find R when m=45, v=7, and F=245.

R=9

F=ma indicates that force (*F*) equals mass (*m*) times acceleration
(*a*). Find the acceleration of a mass of 50 kg if a force of 12 N is
exerted on it.

Sum= 1 1−r is the formula for an infinite series sum. If the sum is 5,
find r.

r= 4 5 or 0.8

For the following exercises, solve for the given variable in the
formula. After obtaining a new version of the formula, you will use it
to solve a question.

Solve for *W*: P=2L+2W

Use the formula from the previous question to find the width, W, of a
rectangle whose length is 15 and whose perimeter is 58.

W= P−2L 2 = 58−2(15) 2 =14

Solve for f: 1 p + 1 q = 1 f

Use the formula from the previous question to find f when p=8and q=13.

f= pq p+q = 8(13) 8+13 = 104 21

Solve for m in the slope-intercept formula: y=mx+b

Use the formula from the previous question to find m when the
coordinates of the point are ( 4,7 ) and b=12.

m= −5 4

The area of a trapezoid is given by A= 1 2 h( b 1 + b 2 ). Use the
formula to find the area of a trapezoid with h=6, b 1 =14,and  b 2 =8.

Solve for *h:* A= 1 2 h( b 1 + b 2 )

h= 2A b 1 + b 2

Use the formula from the previous question to find the height of a
trapezoid with A=150, b 1 =19, and  b 2 =11.

Find the dimensions of an American football field. The length is 200 ft
more than the width, and the perimeter is 1,040 ft. Find the length and
width. Use the perimeter formula P=2L+2W.

length = 360 ft; width = 160 ft

Distance equals rate times time, d=rt. Find the distance Tom travels if
he is moving at a rate of 55 mi/h for 3.5 h.

Using the formula in the previous exercise, find the distance that Susan
travels if she is moving at a rate of 60 mi/h for 6.75 h.

405 mi

What is the total distance that two people travel in 3 h if one of them
is riding a bike at 15 mi/h and the other is walking at 3 mi/h?

If the area model for a triangle is A= 1 2 bh, find the area of a
triangle with a height of 16 in. and a base of 11 in.

A=88in . 2

Solve for *h:* A= 1 2 bh

Use the formula from the previous question to find the height to the
nearest tenth of a triangle with a base of 15 and an area of 215.

28.7

The volume formula for a cylinder is V=π r 2 h. Using the symbol π in
your answer, find the volume of a cylinder with a radius, r, of 4 cm and
a height of 14 cm.

Solve for *h:* V=π r 2 h

h= V π r 2

Use the formula from the previous question to find the height of a
cylinder with a radius of 8 and a volume of 16π

Solve for *r:* V=π r 2 h

r= V πh

Use the formula from the previous question to find the radius of a
cylinder with a height of 36 and a volume of 324π.

The formula for the circumference of a circle is C=2πr. Find the
circumference of a circle with a diameter of 12 in. (diameter = 2*r*).
Use the symbol π in your final answer.

C=12π

Solve the formula from the previous question for π. Notice why π is
sometimes defined as the ratio of the circumference to its diameter.

# 

area

in square units, the area formula used in this section is used to find
the area of any two-dimensional rectangular region:

A

=

L

W

perimeter

in linear units, the perimeter formula is used to find the linear
measurement, or outside length and width, around a two-dimensional
regular object; for a rectangle:

P

=

2

L

\+

2

W

volume

in cubic units, the volume measurement includes length, width, and
depth:

V

=

L

W

H
