m51255

> In this section, you will:
>
> Add and subtract complex numbers.
>
> Multiply and divide complex numbers.
>
> Simplify powers of
>
> i

4aa9351c-019f-4c06-bb40-d58262ea7ec7

#  {#eip-178}

## Learning Objectives {#eip-517}

Use the product property to simplify radical expressions (IA 8.2.1)

Evaluate the square root of a negative number (IA 8.8.1)

## Objective 1: Use the product property to simplify radical expressions (IA 8.2.1) {#eip-155}

:::: {#fs-id1167836243296 .note}
::: title
Simplify a radical expression using the Product Property.
:::

Find the largest factor in the radicand that is a perfect power of the
index. Rewrite the radicand as a product of two factors, using that
factor.

Use the product rule to rewrite the radical as the product of two
radicals.

Simplify the root of the perfect power.
::::

::: {#eip-389 .example}
Simplify: ⓐ 500 ⓑ 163 ⓒ 2434.

ⓐ

  ---------------------------------------------------------------------------- -------
                                                                               500
  Rewrite the radicand as a product using the largest perfect square factor.   100·5
  Rewrite the radical as the product of two radicals.                          100·5
  Simplify.                                                                    105
  ---------------------------------------------------------------------------- -------

ⓑ

  -------------------------------------------------------------------------- -------
                                                                             163
  Rewrite the radicand as a product using the largest perfect cube factor.   8·23
  Rewrite the radical as the product of two radicals.                        83·23
  Simplify.                                                                  223
  -------------------------------------------------------------------------- -------

ⓒ

  ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------- --------
                                                                                     2434
  Rewrite the radicand as a product using the largest perfect fourth power factor.   81·34
  Rewrite the radical as the product of two radicals.                                814·34
  Simplify.                                                                          334
  ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------- --------

ⓓ

  --------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ---------
                                                                                    x85
  Rewrite the radicand as a product using the largest perfect fifth power factor.   x5·x35
  Rewrite the radical as the product of two radicals.                               x55 x35
  Simplify.                                                                         xx35
  --------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ---------
:::

### Practice Makes Perfect {#fs-idm373993920}

Simplify a radical expression using the Product Property.

54

125

25x3

6253

1283

x104

16r94

81s10q44

## Objective 2: Evaluate the square root of a negative number (IA 8.8.1) {#eip-100}

Imaginary numbers result when we try to take the square root of a
negative number. They do not belong to the set of real numbers and so
are called imaginary or complex. We will see complex solutions when we
solve quadratic equations whose graph does not touch the x-axis.
Imaginary numbers are used in many real-life applications including the
study of electricity involving alternating current (AC) electronics.
Wireless, cellular and radar technologies utilize imaginary numbers.
Electrical engineers use imaginary numbers to measure the amplitude and
phase of electrical oscillations.

:::: {#eip-568 .note}
::: title
Important Facts to Remember:
:::

\-

1

=

i

(a complex, or imaginary number)

i

2

=

-1

(a real number)

a

\+

b

i

=

standard form for a complex number

a

b

=

a

b

(product rule for radicals)

a

\-

b

i

=

the complex conjugate of

a

\+

b

i
::::

:::: {#eip-871 .example}
::: title
Evaluate the square root of a negative number
:::

Simplify: ⓐ -64 ⓑ -98 ⓒ -243

ⓐ -64 Rewrite the radicand as a product. -1⋅64 Rewrite the radical as
the product of two radicals. -1⋅64 Use the definition of i and simplify
radical terms. i⋅8=8i ⓑ -98 Rewrite the radicand as a product using the
largest perfect square factor. -1⋅49⋅2 Rewrite the radical as the
product of three radicals. -1⋅49⋅2 Use the definition of i and simplify
radical terms. 7i2 ⓒ -243 Rewrite the radicand as a product using the
largest perfect square factor. -1⋅81⋅3 Rewrite the radical as the
product of three radicals. -1⋅81⋅3 Use the definition of i and simplify
radical terms. 9i3
::::

### Practice Makes Perfect {#eip-983}

Evaluate the square root of a negative number. Perform any indicated
operations and simplify.

-100

-12

-75

Multiply: -49⋅-9

Multiply: 36⋅-81

Multiply: (2\--16)(3+-4)

Multiply: (2+-25)(2\--25)

Add: (1+3i)+(7+4i)

Add: (5\--36)+(2\--49)

Subtract: (5\--36)-(2\--49)

Subtract: (-7\--50)-(-32\--18)

<figure id="Figure_02_04_001">

</figure>

Discovered by Benoit Mandelbrot around 1980, the Mandelbrot Set is one
of the most recognizable fractal images. The image is built on the
theory of self-similarity and the operation of iteration. Zooming in on
a fractal image brings many surprises, particularly in the high level of
repetition of detail that appears as magnification increases. The
equation that generates this image turns out to be rather simple.

In order to better understand it, we need to become familiar with a new
set of numbers. Keep in mind that the study of mathematics continuously
builds upon itself. Negative integers, for example, fill a void left by
the set of positive integers. The set of rational numbers, in turn,
fills a void left by the set of integers. The set of real numbers fills
a void left by the set of rational numbers. Not surprisingly, the set of
real numbers has voids as well. In this section, we will explore a set
of numbers that fills voids in the set of real numbers and find out how
to work within it.

# Expressing Square Roots of Negative Numbers as Multiples of i {#fs-id2425607}

We know how to find the square root of any positive real number. In a
similar way, we can find the square root of any negative number. The
difference is that the root is not real. If the value in the radicand is
negative, the root is said to be an imaginary number*.* The imaginary
number i is defined as the square root of −1.

$$\sqrt{-1} = i$$

So, using properties of radicals,

$$i^{2} = \left( \sqrt{- 1} \right)^{2} = -1$$

We can write the square root of any negative number as a multiple of i.
Consider the square root of −49.

$$\begin{matrix}
\sqrt{-49} & = & \sqrt{49 \cdot (-1)} \\
 & = & {\sqrt{49}\sqrt{-1}} \\
 & = & {7i}
\end{matrix}$$

We use 7i and not −7i because the principal root of 49 is the positive
root.

A complex number is the sum of a real number and an imaginary number. A
complex number is expressed in standard form when written a+bi where a
is the real part and b is the imaginary part. For example, 5+2i is a
complex number. So, too, is 3+4i 3 .

Imaginary numbers differ from real numbers in that a squared imaginary
number produces a negative real number. Recall that when a positive real
number is squared, the result is a positive real number and when a
negative real number is squared, the result is also a positive real
number. Complex numbers consist of real and imaginary numbers.

:::: {#fs-id1558068 .note}
::: title
Imaginary and Complex Numbers
:::

A complex number is a number of the form a+bi where

a

is the real part of the complex number.

b

is the imaginary part of the complex number.

If b=0, then a+bi is a real number. If a=0 and b is not equal to 0, the
complex number is called a pure imaginary number. An imaginary number is
an even root of a negative number.
::::

:::: {#fs-id1266532 .note}
::: title
:::

How To

*Given an imaginary number, express it in the standard form of a complex
number.*

Write

−

a

as

a

−1

.

Express

−1

as

i

.

Write

a

⋅

i

in simplest form.
::::

::: {#Example_02_04_01 .example}
Express −9 in standard form.

$$\begin{array}{ccl}
\sqrt{-9} & = & {\sqrt{9}\sqrt{-1}} \\
 & = & {3i}
\end{array}$$

In standard form, this is 0+3i.
:::

:::: {#fs-id2375806 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Express −24 in standard form.

−24 =0+2i 6
::::

# Plotting a Complex Number on the Complex Plane {#fs-id1591834}

We cannot plot complex numbers on a number line as we might real
numbers. However, we can still represent them graphically. To represent
a complex number, we need to address the two components of the number.
We use the complex plane, which is a coordinate system in which the
horizontal axis represents the real component and the vertical axis
represents the imaginary component. Complex numbers are the points on
the plane, expressed as ordered pairs (a,b), where a represents the
coordinate for the horizontal axis and b represents the coordinate for
the vertical axis.

Let's consider the number −2+3i. The real part of the complex number is
−2 and the imaginary part is 3. We plot the ordered pair (−2,3) to
represent the complex number −2+3i, as shown in [\#](#)*.*

<figure id="Figure_02_04_003">

</figure>

:::: {#fs-id1184889 .note}
::: title
Complex Plane
:::

In the complex plane, the horizontal axis is the real axis, and the
vertical axis is the imaginary axis, as shown in [\#](#).

<figure id="Figure_02_04_004">

</figure>
::::

:::: {#fs-id1273812 .note}
::: title
:::

How To

*Given a complex number, represent its components on the complex plane.*

Determine the real part and the imaginary part of the complex number.

Move along the horizontal axis to show the real part of the number.

Move parallel to the vertical axis to show the imaginary part of the
number.

Plot the point.
::::

::: {#Example_02_04_02 .example}
Plot the complex number 3−4i on the complex plane.

The real part of the complex number is 3, and the imaginary part is --4.
We plot the ordered pair (3,−4) as shown in [\#](#)*.*

<figure id="Figure_02_04_005">

</figure>
:::

:::: {#fs-id2512646 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Plot the complex number −4−i on the complex plane.
::::

# Adding and Subtracting Complex Numbers {#fs-id1424098}

Just as with real numbers, we can perform arithmetic operations on
complex numbers. To add or subtract complex numbers, we combine the real
parts and then combine the imaginary parts.

:::: {#fs-id1442785 .note}
::: title
Complex Numbers: Addition and Subtraction
:::

Adding complex numbers:

$$\left( {a + bi} \right) + \left( {c + di} \right) = \left( {a + c} \right) + \left( {b + d} \right)i$$

Subtracting complex numbers:

$$\left( {a + bi} \right) - \left( {c + di} \right) = \left( {a - c} \right) + \left( {b - d} \right)i$$
::::

:::: {#fs-id1296613 .note}
::: title
:::

How To

*Given two complex numbers, find the sum or difference.*

Identify the real and imaginary parts of each number.

Add or subtract the real parts.

Add or subtract the imaginary parts.
::::

::: {#Example_02_04_03 .example}
Add or subtract as indicated.

ⓐ

(

3

−

4

i

)

\+

(

2

\+

5

i

)

ⓑ

(

−5

\+

7

i

)

−

(

−11

\+

2

i

)

We add the real parts and add the imaginary parts.

ⓐ

(

3

−

4

i

)

\+

(

2

\+

5

i

)

=

3

−

4

i

\+

2

\+

5

i

=

3

\+

2

\+

(

−4

i

)

\+

5

i

=

(

3

\+

2

)

\+

(

−4

\+

5

)

i

=

5

\+

i

ⓑ

(

−5

\+

7

i

)

−

(

−11

\+

2

i

)

=

−5

\+

7

i

\+

11

−

2

i

=

−5

\+

11

\+

7

i

−

2

i

=

(

−5

\+

11

)

\+

(

7

−

2

)

i

=

6

\+

5

i
:::

:::: {#fs-id2302121 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Subtract 2+5i from 3--4i.

(3−4i)−(2+5i)=1−9i
::::

# Multiplying Complex Numbers {#fs-id1322676}

Multiplying complex numbers is much like multiplying binomials. The
major difference is that we work with the real and imaginary parts
separately.

## Multiplying a Complex Number by a Real Number {#fs-id2995792}

Lets begin by multiplying a complex number by a real number. We
distribute the real number just as we would with a binomial. Consider,
for example, 3( 6+2i ) :

:::: {#fs-id1494245 .note}
::: title
:::

How To

*Given a complex number and a real number, multiply to find the
product.*

Use the distributive property.

Simplify.
::::

::: {#Example_02_04_04 .example}
Find the product 4(2+5i).

Distribute the 4.

$$\begin{array}{ccl}
{4(2 + 5i)} & = & {(4 \cdot 2) + (4 \cdot 5i)} \\
 & = & {8 + 20i}
\end{array}$$
:::

:::: {#fs-id1745333 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Find the product: 1 2 ( 5−2i ).

5 2 −i
::::

## Multiplying Complex Numbers Together {#fs-id1342702}

Now, let's multiply two complex numbers. We can use either the
distributive property or more specifically the FOIL method because we
are dealing with binomials. Recall that FOIL is an acronym for
multiplying First, Inner, Outer, and Last terms together. The difference
with complex numbers is that when we get a squared term, i 2 , it equals
−1.

$$\begin{array}{cclc}
{(a + bi)(c + di)} & = & {ac + adi + bci + bdi^{2}} & \\
 & = & {ac + adi + bci - bd} & {\qquad i^{2} = -1} \\
 & = & {(ac - bd) + (ad + bc)i} & {\qquad\text{Group~real~terms~and~imaginary~terms}.}
\end{array}$$

:::: {#fs-id1758537 .note}
::: title
:::

How To

*Given two complex numbers, multiply to find the product.*

Use the distributive property or the FOIL method.

Remember that

i

2

=

−1.

Group together the real terms and the imaginary terms
::::

::: {#Example_02_04_05 .example}
Multiply: ( 4+3i )(2−5i).

$$\begin{array}{ccl}
{(4 + 3i)(2 - 5i)} & = & {4(2) - 4(5i) + 3i(2) - (3i)(5i)} \\
 & = & {8 - 20i + 6i - 15\left( i^{2} \right)} \\
 & = & {(8 + 15) + (-20 + 6)i} \\
 & = & {23 - 14i}
\end{array}$$
:::

:::: {#fs-id2486744 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Multiply: ( 3−4i )( 2+3i ).

18+i
::::

# Dividing Complex Numbers {#fs-id1555648}

Dividing two complex numbers is more complicated than adding,
subtracting, or multiplying because we cannot divide by an imaginary
number, meaning that any fraction must have a real-number denominator to
write the answer in standard form a+bi. We need to find a term by which
we can multiply the numerator and the denominator that will eliminate
the imaginary portion of the denominator so that we end up with a real
number as the denominator. This term is called the complex conjugate of
the denominator, which is found by changing the sign of the imaginary
part of the complex number. In other words, the complex conjugate of
a+bi is a−bi. For example, the product of a+bi and a−bi is

$$\begin{matrix}
{(a + bi)(a - bi)} & = & {a^{2} - abi + abi - b^{2}i^{2}} \\
 & = & {a^{2} + b^{2}}
\end{matrix}$$

The result is a real number.

Note that complex conjugates have an opposite relationship: The complex
conjugate of a+bi is a−bi, and the complex conjugate of a−bi is a+bi.
Further, when a quadratic equation with real coefficients has complex
solutions, the solutions are always complex conjugates of one another.

Suppose we want to divide c+di by a+bi, where neither a nor b equals
zero. We first write the division as a fraction, then find the complex
conjugate of the denominator, and multiply.

$$\frac{c + di}{a + bi}\mspace{9mu}\text{where~}a \neq 0\mspace{9mu}\text{and~}b \neq 0$$

Multiply the numerator and denominator by the complex conjugate of the
denominator.

$$\frac{\left( {c + di} \right)}{\left( {a + bi} \right)} \cdot \frac{\left( {a - bi} \right)}{\left( {a - bi} \right)} = \frac{\left( {c + di} \right)\left( {a - bi} \right)}{\left( {a + bi} \right)\left( {a - bi} \right)}$$

Apply the distributive property.

$$= \frac{ca - cbi + adi - bdi^{2}}{a^{2} - abi + abi - b^{2}i^{2}}$$

Simplify, remembering that i 2 =−1.

$$\begin{array}{l}
{= \frac{ca - cbi + adi - bd(-1)}{a^{2} - abi + abi - b^{2}(-1)}} \\
{= \frac{(ca + bd) + (ad - cb)i}{a^{2} + b^{2}}}
\end{array}$$

:::: {#fs-id1392562 .note}
::: title
The Complex Conjugate
:::

The complex conjugate of a complex number a+bi is a−bi. It is found by
changing the sign of the imaginary part of the complex number. The real
part of the number is left unchanged.

When a complex number is multiplied by its complex conjugate, the result
is a real number.

When a complex number is added to its complex conjugate, the result is a
real number.
::::

::: {#Example_02_04_06 .example}
Find the complex conjugate of each number.

ⓐ

2

\+

i

5

ⓑ

−

1

2

i

ⓐ

The number is already in the form

a

\+

b

i

.

The complex conjugate is

a

−

b

i

,

or

2

−

i

5

.

ⓑ

We can rewrite this number in the form

a

\+

b

i

as

0

−

1

2

i

.

The complex conjugate is

a

−

b

i

,

or

0

\+

1

2

i

.

This can be written simply as

1

2

i

.

Although we have seen that we can find the complex conjugate of an
imaginary number, in practice we generally find the complex conjugates
of only complex numbers with both a real and an imaginary component. To
obtain a real number from an imaginary number, we can simply multiply by
i.
:::

:::: {#fs-id1445609 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Find the complex conjugate of −3+4i.

−3−4i
::::

:::: {#fs-id2521760 .note}
::: title
:::

How To

*Given two complex numbers, divide one by the other.*

Write the division problem as a fraction.

Determine the complex conjugate of the denominator.

Multiply the numerator and denominator of the fraction by the complex
conjugate of the denominator.

Simplify.
::::

::: {#Example_02_04_07 .example}
Divide: ( 2+5i ) by ( 4−i ).

We begin by writing the problem as a fraction.

$$\frac{\left( {2 + 5i} \right)}{\left( {4 - i} \right)}$$

Then we multiply the numerator and denominator by the complex conjugate
of the denominator.

$$\frac{(2 + 5i)}{(4 - i)}\mspace{9mu} \cdot \frac{(4 + i)}{(4 + i)}$$

To multiply two complex numbers, we expand the product as we would with
polynomials (using FOIL).

$$\begin{array}{cclc}
{\frac{(2 + 5i)}{(4 - i)} \cdot \frac{(4 + i)}{(4 + i)}} & = & \frac{8 + 2i + 20i + 5i^{2}}{16 + 4i - 4i - i^{2}} & \\
 & = & \frac{8 + 2i + 20i + 5(-1)}{16 + 4i - 4i - (-1)} & {\qquad\text{Because}~i^{2} = -1.} \\
 & = & \frac{3 + 22i}{17} & \\
 & = & {\frac{3}{17} + \frac{22}{17}i} & {\qquad\text{Separate~real~and~imaginary~parts}.}
\end{array}$$

Note that this expresses the quotient in standard form.
:::

# Simplifying Powers of *i* {#fs-id1555717}

The powers of i are cyclic. Let's look at what happens when we raise i
to increasing powers.

$$\begin{array}{l}
{i^{1} = i} \\
{i^{2} = -1} \\
{i^{3} = i^{2} \cdot i = -1 \cdot i = -i} \\
{i^{4} = i^{3} \cdot i = -i \cdot i = -i^{2} = - (-1) = 1} \\
{i^{5} = i^{4} \cdot i = 1 \cdot i = i}
\end{array}$$

We can see that when we get to the fifth power of i, it is equal to the
first power. As we continue to multiply i by increasing powers, we will
see a cycle of four. Let's examine the next four powers of i.

$$\begin{array}{l}
{i^{6} = i^{5} \cdot i = i \cdot i = i^{2} = -1} \\
{i^{7} = i^{6} \cdot i = i^{2} \cdot i = i^{3} = -i} \\
{i^{8} = i^{7} \cdot i = i^{3} \cdot i = i^{4} = 1} \\
{i^{9} = i^{8} \cdot i = i^{4} \cdot i = i^{5} = i}
\end{array}$$

The cycle is repeated continuously: i,−1,−i,1, every four powers.

::: {#Example_02_04_08 .example}
Evaluate: i 35 .

Since i 4 =1, we can simplify the problem by factoring out as many
factors of i 4 as possible. To do so, first determine how many times 4
goes into 35: 35=4⋅8+3.

$$i^{35} = i^{4 \cdot 8 + 3} = i^{4 \cdot 8} \cdot i^{3} = \left( i^{4} \right)^{8} \cdot i^{3} = 1^{8} \cdot i^{3} = i^{3} = - i$$
:::

:::: {#fs-id1845345 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Evaluate: i 18

−1
::::

:::: {#fs-id1567766 .note}
::: title
:::

Q&A

*Can we write i 35 in other helpful ways?*

*As we saw in [\#](#), we reduced i 35 to i 3 by dividing the exponent
by 4 and using the remainder to find the simplified form. But perhaps
another factorization of i 35 may be more useful. [\#](#) shows some
other possible factorizations.*

  ------------------------- --------------- -------------- ------------ ------------------
  *Factorization of* i 35   i 34 ⋅i         i 33 ⋅ i 2     i 31 ⋅ i 4   i 19 ⋅ i 16
  *Reduced form*            ( i 2 ) 17 ⋅i   i 33 ⋅( −1 )   i 31 ⋅1      i 19 ⋅ ( i 4 ) 4
  *Simplified form*         ( −1 ) 17 ⋅i    − i 33         i 31         i 19
  ------------------------- --------------- -------------- ------------ ------------------

*Each of these will eventually result in the answer we obtained above
but may require several more steps than our earlier method.*
::::

:::: {#fs-id2888800 .note}
::: title
:::

Media

Access these online resources for additional instruction and practice
with complex numbers.

Adding and Subtracting Complex Numbers

Multiply Complex Numbers

Multiplying Complex Conjugates

Raising

i

to Powers
::::

# Key Concepts {#fs-id2528207}

The square root of any negative number can be written as a multiple of

i

.

See

.

To plot a complex number, we use two number lines, crossed to form the
complex plane. The horizontal axis is the real axis, and the vertical
axis is the imaginary axis. See

.

Complex numbers can be added and subtracted by combining the real parts
and combining the imaginary parts. See

.

Complex numbers can be multiplied and divided.

To multiply complex numbers, distribute just as with polynomials. See

and

.

To divide complex numbers, multiply both numerator and denominator by
the complex conjugate of the denominator to eliminate the complex number
from the denominator. See

and

.

The powers of

i

are cyclic, repeating every fourth one. See

.

# Section Exercises {#fs-id3236190}

## Verbal {#fs-id1399221}

Explain how to add complex numbers.

Add the real parts together and the imaginary parts together.

What is the basic principle in multiplication of complex numbers?

Give an example to show that the product of two imaginary numbers is not
always imaginary.

Possible answer: i times i equals -1, which is not imaginary.

What is a characteristic of the plot of a real number in the complex
plane?

## Algebraic {#fs-id2979908}

For the following exercises, evaluate the algebraic expressions.

If y= x 2 +x−4, evaluate y given x=2i.

−8+2i

If y= x 3 −2, evaluate y given x=i.

If y= x 2 +3x+5, evaluate y given x=2+i.

14+7i

If y=2 x 2 +x−3, evaluate y given x=2−3i.

If y= x+1 2−x , evaluate y given x=5i.

− 23 29 + 15 29 i

If y= 1+2x x+3 , evaluate y given x=4i.

## Graphical {#fs-id1512803}

For the following exercises, plot the complex numbers on the complex
plane.

1−2i

−2+3i

i

−3−4i

## Numeric {#fs-id2644609}

For the following exercises, perform the indicated operation and express
the result as a simplified complex number.

( 3+2i )+(5−3i)

8−i

( −2−4i )+( 1+6i )

( −5+3i )−(6−i)

−11+4i

( 2−3i )−(3+2i)

(−4+4i)−(−6+9i)

2−5i

( 2+3i )(4i)

( 5−2i )(3i)

6+15i

( 6−2i )(5)

( −2+4i )( 8 )

−16+32i

( 2+3i )(4−i)

( −1+2i )(−2+3i)

−4−7i

( 4−2i )(4+2i)

( 3+4i )( 3−4i )

25

3+4i 2

6−2i 3

2− 2 3 i

−5+3i 2i

6+4i i

4−6i

2−3i 4+3i

3+4i 2−i

2 5 + 11 5 i

2+3i 2−3i

−9 +3 −16

15i

− −4 −4 −25

2+ −12 2

1+i 3

4+ −20 2

i 8

1

i 15

i 22

−1

## Technology {#fs-id1537530}

For the following exercises, use a calculator to help answer the
questions.

Evaluate (1+i) k for k=4,8, and 12. Predict the value if k=16.

Evaluate (1−i) k for k=2,6, and 10. Predict the value if k=14.

128i

Evaluate (l+i) k − (l−i) k for k=4,8, and 12. Predict the value for
k=16.

Show that a solution of x 6 +1=0 is 3 2 + 1 2 i.

( 3 2 + 1 2 i ) 6 =−1

Show that a solution of x 8 −1=0 is 2 2 + 2 2 i.

## Extensions {#fs-id2494010}

For the following exercises, evaluate the expressions, writing the
result as a simplified complex number.

1 i + 4 i 3

3i

1 i 11 − 1 i 21

i 7 ( 1+ i 2 )

0

i −3 +5 i 7

( 2+i )( 4−2i ) (1+i)

5−5i

( 1+3i )( 2−4i ) (1+2i)

( 3+i ) 2 ( 1+2i ) 2

−2i

3+2i 2+i +( 4+3i )

4+i i + 3−4i 1−i

9 2 − 9 2 i

3+2i 1+2i − 2−3i 3+i

# 

complex conjugate

a complex number containing the same terms as another complex number,
but with the opposite operator. Multiplying a complex number by its
conjugate yields a real number.

complex number

the sum of a real number and an imaginary number; the standard form is

a

\+

b

i

,

where

a

is the real part and

b

is the complex part.

complex plane

the coordinate plane in which the horizontal axis represents the real
component of a complex number, and the vertical axis represents the
imaginary component, labeled

i

.

imaginary number

the square root of

−1

:

i

=

−1

.
