m51258

> In this section, you will:
>
> Solve equations involving rational exponents.
>
> Solve equations using factoring.
>
> Solve radical equations.
>
> Solve absolute value equations.
>
> Solve other types of equations.

b88d40b3-a0d5-4a8f-8b2e-85993b911cc0

We have solved linear equations, rational equations, and quadratic
equations using several methods. However, there are many other types of
equations, and we will investigate a few more types in this section. We
will look at equations involving rational exponents, polynomial
equations, radical equations, absolute value equations, equations in
quadratic form, and some rational equations that can be transformed into
quadratics. Solving any equation, however, employs the same basic
algebraic rules. We will learn some new techniques as they apply to
certain equations, but the algebra never changes.

# Solving Equations Involving Rational Exponents {#fs-id2485804}

Rational exponents are exponents that are fractions, where the numerator
is a power and the denominator is a root. For example, 16 1 2 is another
way of writing 16 ; 8 1 3 is another way of writing ​ 8 3 . The ability
to work with rational exponents is a useful skill, as it is highly
applicable in calculus.

We can solve equations in which a variable is raised to a rational
exponent by raising both sides of the equation to the reciprocal of the
exponent. The reason we raise the equation to the reciprocal of the
exponent is because we want to eliminate the exponent on the variable
term, and a number multiplied by its reciprocal equals 1. For example, 2
3 ( 3 2 )=1, 3( 1 3 )=1, and so on.

:::: {#fs-id1319605 .note}
::: title
Rational Exponents
:::

A rational exponent indicates a power in the numerator and a root in the
denominator. There are multiple ways of writing an expression, a
variable, or a number with a rational exponent:

$$a^{\frac{m}{n}} = \left( a^{\frac{1}{n}} \right)^{m} = \left( a^{m} \right)^{\frac{1}{n}} = \sqrt[n]{a^{m}} = \left( \sqrt[n]{a} \right)^{m}$$
::::

::: {#Example_02_06_01 .example}
Evaluate 8 2 3 .

Whether we take the root first or the power first depends on the number.
It is easy to find the cube root of 8, so rewrite 8 2 3 as ( 8 1 3 ) 2 .

$$\begin{array}{ccl}
\left( 8^{\frac{1}{3}} \right)^{2} & = & {(2)}^{2} \\
 & = & 4
\end{array}$$
:::

:::: {#fs-id1514351 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Evaluate 64 − 1 3 .

1 4
::::

::: {#Example_02_06_02 .example}
Solve the equation in which a variable is raised to a rational exponent:
x 5 4 =32.

The way to remove the exponent on *x* is by raising both sides of the
equation to a power that is the reciprocal of 5 4 , which is 4 5 .

$$\begin{array}{cclc}
x^{\frac{5}{4}} & = & 32 & \\
\left( x^{\frac{5}{4}} \right)^{\frac{4}{5}} & = & {(32)}^{\frac{4}{5}} & \\
x & = & {(2)}^{4} & {\qquad\text{The~fifth~root~of~32~is~2.}} \\
 & = & 16 & 
\end{array}$$
:::

:::: {#fs-id1759744 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Solve the equation x 3 2 =125.

25
::::

::: {#Example_02_06_03 .example}
Solve 3 x 3 4 = x 1 2 .

This equation involves rational exponents as well as factoring rational
exponents. Let us take this one step at a time. First, put the variable
terms on one side of the equal sign and set the equation equal to zero.

$$\begin{array}{rcl}
{3x^{\frac{3}{4}} - \left( x^{\frac{1}{2}} \right)} & = & {x^{\frac{1}{2}} - \left( x^{\frac{1}{2}} \right)} \\
{3x^{\frac{3}{4}} - x^{\frac{1}{2}}} & = & 0
\end{array}$$

Now, it looks like we should factor the left side, but what do we factor
out? We can always factor the term with the lowest exponent. Rewrite x 1
2 as x 2 4 . Then, factor out x 2 4 from both terms on the left.

$$\begin{array}{rcl}
{3x^{\frac{3}{4}} - x^{\frac{2}{4}}} & = & 0 \\
{x^{\frac{2}{4}}\left( {3x^{\frac{1}{4}} - 1} \right)} & = & 0
\end{array}$$

Where did x 1 4 come from? Remember, when we multiply two numbers with
the same base, we add the exponents. Therefore, if we multiply x 2 4
back in using the distributive property, we get the expression we had
before the factoring, which is what should happen. We need an exponent
such that when added to 2 4 equals 3 4 . Thus, the exponent on *x* in
the parentheses is 1 4 .

Let us continue. Now we have two factors and can use the zero factor
theorem.

$$\begin{array}{rclc}
{x^{\frac{2}{4}}\left( {3x^{\frac{1}{4}} - 1} \right)} & = & 0 & \\
x^{\frac{2}{4}} & = & 0 & \\
x & = & 0 & \\
{3x^{\frac{1}{4}} - 1} & = & 0 & \\
{3x^{\frac{1}{4}}} & = & 1 & \\
x^{\frac{1}{4}} & = & \frac{1}{3} & {\qquad\text{Divide~both~sides~by~3}.} \\
\left( x^{\frac{1}{4}} \right)^{4} & = & \left( \frac{1}{3} \right)^{4} & {\qquad\text{Raise~both~sides~to~the~reciprocal~of~}\frac{1}{4}.} \\
x & = & \frac{1}{81} & 
\end{array}$$

The two solutions are 0 and 1 81 .
:::

:::: {#fs-id1267637 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Solve: ( x+5 ) 3 2 =8.

{ −1 }
::::

# Solving Equations Using Factoring {#fs-id2945385}

We have used factoring to solve quadratic equations, but it is a
technique that we can use with many types of polynomial equations, which
are equations that contain a string of terms including numerical
coefficients and variables. When we are faced with an equation
containing polynomials of degree higher than 2, we can often solve them
by factoring.

:::: {#fs-id1786047 .note}
::: title
Polynomial Equations
:::

A polynomial of degree *n* is an expression of the type

$$a_{n}x^{n} + a_{n - 1}x^{n - 1} + \mspace{9mu}\mspace{9mu}\mspace{9mu} \cdot \mspace{9mu}\mspace{9mu} \cdot \mspace{9mu}\mspace{9mu} \cdot \mspace{9mu}\mspace{9mu} + a_{2}x^{2} + a_{1}x + a_{0}$$

where *n* is a positive integer and a n ,..., a 0 are real numbers and a
n ≠0.

Setting the polynomial equal to zero gives a polynomial equation. The
total number of solutions (real and complex) to a polynomial equation is
equal to the highest exponent *n*.
::::

::: {#Example_02_06_04 .example}
Solve the polynomial by factoring: 5 x 4 =80 x 2 .

First, set the equation equal to zero. Then factor out what is common to
both terms, the GCF.

$$\begin{array}{rcl}
{5x^{4} - 80x^{2}} & = & 0 \\
{5x^{2}\left( x^{2} - 16 \right)} & = & 0
\end{array}$$

Notice that we have the difference of squares in the factor x 2 −16,
which we will continue to factor and obtain two solutions. The first
term, 5 x 2 , generates, technically, two solutions as the exponent is
2, but they are the same solution.

$$\begin{array}{rcl}
{5x^{2}} & = & 0 \\
x & = & 0 \\
{x^{2} - 16} & = & 0 \\
{(x - 4)(x + 4)} & = & 0 \\
x & = & 4 \\
x & = & -4
\end{array}$$

The solutions are 0(double solution), 4, and −4.

We can see the solutions on the graph in [\#](#). The *x-*coordinates of
the points where the graph crosses the *x-*axis are the solutions---the
*x-*intercepts. Notice on the graph that at the solution 0, the graph
touches the *x-*axis and bounces back. It does not cross the *x-*axis.
This is typical of double solutions.

<figure id="Figure_02_06_001">

</figure>
:::

:::: {#fs-id988839 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Solve by factoring: 12 x 4 =3 x 2 .

0, 1 2 , − 1 2
::::

::: {#Example_02_06_05 .example}
Solve a polynomial by grouping: x 3 + x 2 −9x−9=0.

This polynomial consists of 4 terms, which we can solve by grouping.
Grouping procedures require factoring the first two terms and then
factoring the last two terms. If the factors in the parentheses are
identical, we can continue the process and solve, unless more factoring
is suggested.

$$\begin{array}{rcl}
{x^{3} + x^{2} - 9x - 9} & = & 0 \\
{x^{2}(x + 1) - 9(x + 1)} & = & 0 \\
{\left( x^{2} - 9 \right)(x + 1)} & = & 0
\end{array}$$

The grouping process ends here, as we can factor x 2 −9 using the
difference of squares formula.

$$\begin{array}{ccl}
{\left( x^{2} - 9 \right)(x + 1)} & = & 0 \\
{(x - 3)(x + 3)(x + 1)} & = & 0 \\
x & = & 3 \\
x & = & -3 \\
x & = & -1
\end{array}$$

The solutions are 3, −3, and −1. Note that the highest exponent is 3 and
we obtained 3 solutions. We can see the solutions, the *x-*intercepts,
on the graph in [\#](#)*.*

<figure id="Figure_02_06_002">

</figure>

We looked at solving quadratic equations by factoring when the leading
coefficient is 1. When the leading coefficient is not 1, we solved by
grouping. Grouping requires four terms, which we obtained by splitting
the linear term of quadratic equations. We can also use grouping for
some polynomials of degree higher than 2, as we saw here, since there
were already four terms.
:::

# Solving Radical Equations {#fs-id2506398}

*Radical equations* are equations that contain variables in the radicand
(the expression under a radical symbol), such as

$$\begin{array}{rcl}
\sqrt{3x + 18} & = & x \\
\sqrt{x + 3} & = & {x - 3} \\
{\sqrt{x + 5} - \sqrt{x - 3}} & = & 2
\end{array}$$

Radical equations may have one or more radical terms, and are solved by
eliminating each radical, one at a time. We have to be careful when
solving radical equations, as it is not unusual to find extraneous
solutions, roots that are not, in fact, solutions to the equation. These
solutions are not due to a mistake in the solving method, but result
from the process of raising both sides of an equation to a power.
However, checking each answer in the original equation will confirm the
true solutions.

:::: {#fs-id2506978 .note}
::: title
Radical Equations
:::

An equation containing terms with a variable in the radicand is called a
radical equation.
::::

:::: {#fs-id2307719 .note}
::: title
:::

How To

*Given a radical equation, solve it.*

Isolate the radical expression on one side of the equal sign. Put all
remaining terms on the other side.

If the radical is a square root, then square both sides of the equation.
If it is a cube root, then raise both sides of the equation to the third
power. In other words, for an

n

th root radical, raise both sides to the

n

th power. Doing so eliminates the radical symbol.

Solve the remaining equation.

If a radical term still remains, repeat steps 1--2.

Confirm solutions by substituting them into the original equation.
::::

::: {#Example_02_06_06 .example}
Solve 15−2x =x.

The radical is already isolated on the left side of the equal side, so
proceed to square both sides.

$$\begin{array}{rcl}
\sqrt{15 - 2x} & = & x \\
\left( \sqrt{15 - 2x} \right)^{2} & = & {(x)}^{2} \\
{15 - 2x} & = & x^{2}
\end{array}$$

We see that the remaining equation is a quadratic. Set it equal to zero
and solve.

$$\begin{array}{ccl}
0 & = & {x^{2} + 2x - 15} \\
 & = & {(x + 5)(x - 3)} \\
x & = & -5 \\
x & = & 3
\end{array}$$

The proposed solutions are −5 and 3. Let us check each solution back in
the original equation. First, check x=−5.

$$\begin{array}{rcl}
\sqrt{15 - 2x} & = & x \\
\sqrt{15 - 2( - 5)} & = & -5 \\
\sqrt{25} & = & -5 \\
5 & \neq & {\operatorname{}-5}
\end{array}$$

This is an extraneous solution. While no mistake was made solving the
equation, we found a solution that does not satisfy the original
equation.

Check x=3.

$$\begin{array}{rcl}
\sqrt{15 - 2x} & = & x \\
\sqrt{15 - 2(3)} & = & 3 \\
\sqrt{9} & = & 3 \\
3 & = & 3
\end{array}$$

The solution is 3.
:::

:::: {#fs-id1441693 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Solve the radical equation: x+3 =3x−1

1; extraneous solution − 2 9
::::

::: {#Example_02_06_07 .example}
Solve 2x+3 + x−2 =4.

As this equation contains two radicals, we isolate one radical,
eliminate it, and then isolate the second radical.

$$\begin{array}{rclc}
{\sqrt{2x + 3} + \sqrt{x - 2}} & = & 4 & \\
\sqrt{2x + 3} & = & {4 - \sqrt{x - 2}} & {\qquad\text{Subtract~}\sqrt{x - 2}\mspace{9mu}\text{from~both~sides}.} \\
\left( \sqrt{2x + 3} \right)^{2} & = & \left( 4 - \sqrt{x - 2} \right)^{2} & {\qquad\text{Square~both~sides}.}
\end{array}$$

Use the perfect square formula to expand the right side: ( a−b ) 2 = a 2
−2ab+ b 2 .

$$\begin{array}{rclc}
{2x + 3} & = & {{(4)}^{2} - 2(4)\sqrt{x - 2} + \left( \sqrt{x - 2} \right)^{2}} & \\
{2x + 3} & = & {16 - 8\sqrt{x - 2} + (x - 2)} & \\
{2x + 3} & = & {14 + x - 8\sqrt{x - 2}} & {\qquad\text{Combine~like~terms}.} \\
{x - 11} & = & {-8\sqrt{x - 2}} & {\qquad\text{Isolate~the~second~radical}.} \\
{(x - 11)}^{2} & = & \left( -8\sqrt{x - 2} \right)^{2} & {\qquad\text{Square~both~sides}.} \\
{x^{2} - 22x + 121} & = & {64(x - 2)} & 
\end{array}$$

Now that both radicals have been eliminated, set the quadratic equal to
zero and solve.

$$\begin{array}{rclc}
{x^{2} - 22x + 121} & = & {64x - 128} & \\
{x^{2} - 86x + 249} & = & 0 & \\
{(x - 3)(x - 83)} & = & 0 & {\qquad\text{Factor~and~solve}.} \\
x & = & 3 & \\
x & = & 83 & 
\end{array}$$

The proposed solutions are 3 and 83. Check each solution in the original
equation.

$$\begin{array}{rcl}
{\sqrt{2x + 3} + \sqrt{x - 2}} & = & 4 \\
\sqrt{2x + 3} & = & {4 - \sqrt{x - 2}} \\
\sqrt{2(3) + 3} & = & {4 - \sqrt{(3) - 2}} \\
\sqrt{9} & = & {4 - \sqrt{1}} \\
3 & = & 3
\end{array}$$

One solution is 3.

Check x=83.

$$\begin{array}{rcl}
{\sqrt{2x + 3} + \sqrt{x - 2}} & = & 4 \\
\sqrt{2x + 3} & = & {4 - \sqrt{x - 2}} \\
\sqrt{2(83) + 3} & = & {4 - \sqrt{(83 - 2)}} \\
\sqrt{169} & = & {4 - \sqrt{81}} \\
13 & \neq & {- 5}
\end{array}$$

The only solution is 3. We see that 83 is an extraneous solution.
:::

:::: {#fs-id2430499 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Solve the equation with two radicals: 3x+7 + x+2 =1.

−2; extraneous solution −1
::::

# Solving an Absolute Value Equation {#fs-id3240737}

Next, we will learn how to solve an absolute value equation. To solve an
equation such as \| 2x−6 \|=8, we notice that the absolute value will be
equal to 8 if the quantity inside the absolute value bars is 8 or −8.
This leads to two different equations we can solve independently.

$$\begin{array}{rcccrcl}
{2x - 6} & = & 8 & {\qquad\text{or}\qquad} & {2x - 6} & = & -8 \\
{2x} & = & 14 & & {2x} & = & -2 \\
x & = & 7 & & x & = & -1
\end{array}$$

Knowing how to solve problems involving absolute value functions is
useful. For example, we may need to identify numbers or points on a line
that are at a specified distance from a given reference point.

:::: {#fs-id2918915 .note}
::: title
Absolute Value Equations
:::

The absolute value of *x* is written as \| x \|. It has the following
properties:

$$\begin{array}{l}
\left. \text{If~}x \geq 0,\mspace{9mu}\text{then~} \middle| x \middle| = x. \right. \\
\left. \text{If~}x < 0,\mspace{9mu}\text{then~} \middle| x \middle| = -x. \right.
\end{array}$$

For real numbers A and B, an equation of the form \| A \|=B, with B≥0,
will have solutions when A=B or A=−B. If B\<0, the equation \| A \|=B
has no solution.

An absolute value equation in the form \| ax+b \|=c has the following
properties:

$$\begin{array}{l}
\left. \text{If~~}c < 0, \middle| ax + b \middle| = c\mspace{9mu}\text{has~no~solution}. \right. \\
\left. \text{If~~}c = 0, \middle| ax + b \middle| = c\mspace{9mu}\text{has~one~solution}. \right. \\
\left. \text{If~~}c > 0, \middle| ax + b \middle| = c\mspace{9mu}\text{has~two~solutions}. \right.
\end{array}$$
::::

:::: {#fs-id3038796 .note}
::: title
:::

How To

*Given an absolute value equation, solve it.*

Isolate the absolute value expression on one side of the equal sign.

If

c

\>

0

,

write and solve two equations:

a

x

\+

b

=

c

and

a

x

\+

b

=

−

c

.
::::

::: {#Example_02_06_08 .example}
Solve the following absolute value equations:

ⓐ

\|

6

x

\+

4

\|

=

8

ⓑ

\|

3

x

\+

4

\|

=

−9

ⓒ

\|

3

x

−

5

\|

−

4

=

6

ⓓ

\|

−5

x

\+

10

\|

=

0

ⓐ

\| 6x+4 \|=8

Write two equations and solve each:

$$\begin{array}{rclcrcl}
{6x + 4} & = & 8 & \mspace{90mu} & {6x + 4} & = & -8 \\
{6x} & = & 4 & \mspace{90mu} & {6x} & = & -12 \\
x & = & \frac{2}{3} & \mspace{90mu} & x & = & -2
\end{array}$$

The two solutions are 2 3 and −2.

ⓑ

\| 3x+4 \|=−9

There is no solution as an absolute value cannot be negative.

ⓒ

\| 3x−5 \|−4=6

Isolate the absolute value expression and then write two equations.

$$\begin{matrix}
 & & & {\left| {3x - 5} \right| - 4} & = & 6 & & & \\
 & & & \left| {3x - 5} \right| & = & 10 & & & \\
{3x - 5} & = & 10 & & & & {3x - 5} & = & -10 \\
{3x} & = & 15 & & & & {3x} & = & -5 \\
x & = & 5 & & & & x & = & {- \frac{5}{3}}
\end{matrix}$$

There are two solutions: 5, and − 5 3 .

ⓓ

\(d\) \| −5x+10 \|=0

The equation is set equal to zero, so we have to write only one
equation.

$$\begin{array}{rcl}
{-5x + 10} & = & 0 \\
{-5x} & = & -10 \\
x & = & 2
\end{array}$$

There is one solution: 2.
:::

:::: {#fs-id1535632 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Solve the absolute value equation: \| 1−4x \|+8=13.

−1, 3 2
::::

# Solving Other Types of Equations {#fs-id2653809}

There are many other types of equations in addition to the ones we have
discussed so far. We will see more of them throughout the text. Here, we
will discuss equations that are in quadratic form, and rational
equations that result in a quadratic.

## Solving Equations in Quadratic Form {#fs-id1923869}

*Equations in quadratic form* are equations with three terms. The first
term has a power other than 2. The middle term has an exponent that is
one-half the exponent of the leading term. The third term is a constant.
We can solve equations in this form as if they were quadratic. A few
examples of these equations include x 4 −5 x 2 +4=0, x 6 +7 x 3 −8=0,
and x 2 3 +4 x 1 3 +2=0. In each one, doubling the exponent of the
middle term equals the exponent on the leading term. We can solve these
equations by substituting a variable for the middle term.

:::: {#fs-id1834422 .note}
::: title
Quadratic Form
:::

If the exponent on the middle term is one-half of the exponent on the
leading term, we have an equation in quadratic form, which we can solve
as if it were a quadratic. We substitute a variable for the middle term
to solve equations in quadratic form.
::::

:::: {#fs-id1954745 .note}
::: title
:::

How To

*Given an equation quadratic in form, solve it.*

Identify the exponent on the leading term and determine whether it is
double the exponent on the middle term.

If it is, substitute a variable, such as

u

, for the variable portion of the middle term.

Rewrite the equation so that it takes on the standard form of a
quadratic.

Solve using one of the usual methods for solving a quadratic.

Replace the substitution variable with the original term.

Solve the remaining equation.
::::

::: {#Example_02_06_09 .example}
Solve this fourth-degree equation: 3 x 4 −2 x 2 −1=0.

This equation fits the main criteria, that the power on the leading term
is double the power on the middle term. Next, we will make a
substitution for the variable term in the middle. Let u= x 2 . Rewrite
the equation in *u*.

$$3u^{2} - 2u - 1 = 0$$

Now solve the quadratic.

$$\begin{array}{rcl}
{3u^{2} - 2u - 1} & = & 0 \\
{\left( {3u + 1} \right)\left( {u - 1} \right)} & = & 0
\end{array}$$

Solve each factor and replace the original term for *u.*

$$\begin{array}{rcl}
{3u + 1} & = & 0 \\
{3u} & = & -1 \\
u & = & {- \frac{1}{3}} \\
x^{2} & = & {- \frac{1}{3}} \\
x & = & {\pm i\sqrt{\frac{1}{3}}}
\end{array}$$

$$\begin{array}{rcl}
{u - 1} & = & 0 \\
u & = & 1 \\
x^{2} & = & 1 \\
x & = & \pm 1
\end{array}$$

The solutions are ±i 1 3 and ±1.
:::

:::: {#fs-id1929412 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Solve using substitution: x 4 −8 x 2 −9=0.

−3,3,−i,i
::::

::: {#Example_02_06_10 .example}
Solve the equation in quadratic form: ( x+2 ) 2 +11( x+2 )−12=0.

This equation contains a binomial in place of the single variable. The
tendency is to expand what is presented. However, recognizing that it
fits the criteria for being in quadratic form makes all the difference
in the solving process. First, make a substitution, letting u=x+2. Then
rewrite the equation in *u.*

$$\begin{array}{rcl}
{u^{2} + 11u - 12} & = & 0 \\
{(u + 12)(u - 1)} & = & 0
\end{array}$$

Solve using the zero-factor property and then replace *u* with the
original expression.

$$\begin{array}{rcl}
{u + 12} & = & 0 \\
u & = & -12 \\
{x + 2} & = & -12 \\
x & = & -14
\end{array}$$

The second factor results in

$$\begin{array}{rcl}
{u - 1} & = & 0 \\
u & = & 1 \\
{x + 2} & = & 1 \\
x & = & -1
\end{array}$$

We have two solutions: −14, and −1.
:::

:::: {#fs-id1736480 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Solve: ( x−5 ) 2 −4( x−5 )−21=0.

2,12
::::

## Solving Rational Equations Resulting in a Quadratic {#fs-id2893053}

Earlier, we solved rational equations. Sometimes, solving a rational
equation results in a quadratic. When this happens, we continue the
solution by simplifying the quadratic equation by one of the methods we
have seen. It may turn out that there is no solution.

::: {#Example_02_06_11 .example}
Solve the following rational equation: −4x x−1 + 4 x+1 = −8 x 2 −1 .

We want all denominators in factored form to find the LCD. Two of the
denominators cannot be factored further. However, x 2 −1=( x+1 )( x−1 ).
Then, the LCD is ( x+1 )( x−1 ). Next, we multiply the whole equation by
the LCD.

$$\begin{array}{rcl}
{(x + 1)(x - 1)\left\lbrack {\frac{-4x}{x - 1} + \frac{4}{x + 1}} \right\rbrack} & = & {\left\lbrack \frac{-8}{(x + 1)(x - 1)} \right\rbrack(x + 1)(x - 1)} \\
{-4x(x + 1) + 4(x - 1)} & = & -8 \\
{-4x^{2} - 4x + 4x - 4} & = & -8 \\
{-4x^{2} + 4} & = & 0 \\
{-4\left( {x^{2} - 1} \right)} & = & 0 \\
{-4(x + 1)(x - 1)} & = & 0 \\
x & = & -1 \\
x & = & 1
\end{array}$$

In this case, either solution produces a zero in the denominator in the
original equation. Thus, there is no solution.
:::

:::: {#fs-id2906702 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Solve 3x+2 x−2 + 1 x = −2 x 2 −2x .

−1 (0 is not a solution).
::::

:::: {#fs-id2665007 .note}
::: title
:::

Media

Access these online resources for additional instruction and practice
with different types of equations.

Rational Equation with no Solution

Solving equations with rational exponents using reciprocal powers

Solving radical equations part 1 of 2

Solving radical equations part 2 of 2
::::

# Key Concepts {#fs-id2755534}

Rational exponents can be rewritten several ways depending on what is
most convenient for the problem. To solve, both sides of the equation
are raised to a power that will render the exponent on the variable
equal to 1. See

,

, and

.

Factoring extends to higher-order polynomials when it involves factoring
out the GCF or factoring by grouping. See

and

.

We can solve radical equations by isolating the radical and raising both
sides of the equation to a power that matches the index. See

and

.

To solve absolute value equations, we need to write two equations, one
for the positive value and one for the negative value. See

.

Equations in quadratic form are easy to spot, as the exponent on the
first term is double the exponent on the second term and the third term
is a constant. We may also see a binomial in place of the single
variable. We use substitution to solve. See

and

.

Solving a rational equation may also lead to a quadratic equation or an
equation in quadratic form. See

.

# Section Exercises {#fs-id3146179}

## Verbal {#fs-id3146185}

In a radical equation, what does it mean if a number is an extraneous
solution?

This is not a solution to the radical equation, it is a value obtained
from squaring both sides and thus changing the signs of an equation
which has caused it not to be a solution in the original equation.

Explain why possible solutions *must* be checked in radical equations.

Your friend tries to calculate the value − 9 3 2 and keeps getting an
ERROR message. What mistake are they probably making?

They are probably trying to enter negative 9, but taking the square root
of −9 is not a real number. The negative sign is in front of this, so
your friend should be taking the square root of 9, cubing it, and then
putting the negative sign in front, resulting in −27.

Explain why \| 2x+5 \|=−7 has no solutions.

Explain how to change a rational exponent into the correct radical
expression.

A rational exponent is a fraction: the denominator of the fraction is
the root or index number and the numerator is the power to which it is
raised.

## Algebraic {#fs-id3018948}

For the following exercises, solve the rational exponent equation. Use
factoring where necessary.

x 2 3 =16

x 3 4 =27

x=81

2 x 1 2 − x 1 4 =0

( x−1 ) 3 4 =8

x=17

( x+1 ) 2 3 =4

x 2 3 −5 x 1 3 +6=0

x=8,  x=27

x 7 3 −3 x 4 3 −4 x 1 3 =0

For the following exercises, solve the following polynomial equations by
grouping and factoring.

x 3 +2 x 2 −x−2=0

x=−2,1,−1

3 x 3 −6 x 2 −27x+54=0

4 y 3 −9y=0

y=0,   3 2 ,   −3 2

x 3 +3 x 2 −25x−75=0

m 3 + m 2 −m−1=0

m=1,−1

2 x 5 −14 x 3 =0

5 x 3 +45x=2 x 2 +18

x= 2 5 , ±3 i

For the following exercises, solve the radical equation. Be sure to
check all solutions to eliminate extraneous solutions.

3x−1 −2=0

x−7 =5

x=32

x−1 =x−7

3t+5 =7

t= 44 3

t+1 +9=7

12−x =x

x=3

2x+3 − x+2 =2

3x+7 + x+2 =1

x=−2

2x+3 − x+1 =1

For the following exercises, solve the equation involving absolute
value.

\| 3x−4 \|=8

x=4, −4 3

\| 2x−3 \|=−2

\| 1−4x \|−1=5

x= −5 4 , 7 4

\| 4x+1 \|−3=6

\| 2x−1 \|−7=−2

x=3,−2

\| 2x+1 \|−2=−3

\| x+5 \|=0

x=−5

−\| 2x+1 \|=−3

For the following exercises, solve the equation by identifying the
quadratic form. Use a substitute variable and find all real solutions by
factoring.

x 4 −10 x 2 +9=0

x=1,−1,3,-3

4 ( t−1 ) 2 −9( t−1 )=−2

( x 2 −1 ) 2 +( x 2 −1 )−12=0

x=2,−2

( x+1 ) 2 −8( x+1 )−9=0

( x−3 ) 2 −4=0

x=1,5

## Extensions {#fs-id2390141}

For the following exercises, solve for the unknown variable.

x −2 − x −1 −12=0

\| x \| 2 =x

x≥0

t 10 −2 t 5 +1=0

\| x 2 +2x−36 \|=12

x=4,6,−6,−8

## Real-World Applications {#fs-id1976510}

For the following exercises, use the model for the period of a pendulum,
T, such that T=2π L g , where the length of the pendulum is *L* and the
acceleration due to gravity is g.

If the acceleration due to gravity is 9.8 m/s2 and the period equals 1
s, find the length to the nearest cm (100 cm = 1 m).

If the gravity is 32 ft/s2 and the period equals 1 s, find the length to
the nearest in. (12 in. = 1 ft). Round your answer to the nearest in.

10 in.

For the following exercises, use a model for body surface area, BSA,
such that BSA= wh 3600 , where *w* = weight in kg and *h* = height in
cm.

Find the height of a 72-kg female to the nearest cm whose BSA=1.8.

Find the weight of a 177-cm male to the nearest kg whose BSA=2.1.

90 kg

# 

absolute value equation

an equation in which the variable appears in absolute value bars,
typically with two solutions, one accounting for the positive expression
and one for the negative expression

equations in quadratic form

equations with a power other than 2 but with a middle term with an
exponent that is one-half the exponent of the leading term

extraneous solutions

any solutions obtained that are not valid in the original equation

polynomial equation

an equation containing a string of terms including numerical
coefficients and variables raised to whole-number exponents

radical equation

an equation containing at least one radical term where the variable is
part of the radicand
