m51259

> In this section, you will:
>
> Use interval notation
>
> Use properties of inequalities.
>
> Solve inequalities in one variable algebraically.
>
> Solve absolute value inequalities.

b888ed1c-c7d6-4bc4-a647-2fb628a05ad5

<figure id="Figure_02_07_001">

</figure>

It is not easy to make the honor roll at most top universities. Suppose
students were required to carry a course load of at least 12 credit
hours and maintain a grade point average of 3.5 or above. How could
these honor roll requirements be expressed mathematically? In this
section, we will explore various ways to express different sets of
numbers, inequalities, and absolute value inequalities.

# Using Interval Notation {#fs-id2781560}

Indicating the solution to an inequality such as x‚â•4 can be achieved in
several ways.

We can use a number line as shown in [\#](#)*.* The blue ray begins at
x=4 and, as indicated by the arrowhead, continues to infinity, which
illustrates that the solution set includes all real numbers greater than
or equal to 4.

<figure id="Figure_02_07_002">

</figure>

We can use set-builder notation: { x\|x‚â•4 }, which translates to "all
real numbers *x* such that *x* is greater than or equal to 4." Notice
that braces are used to indicate a set.

The third method is interval notation, in which solution sets are
indicated with parentheses or brackets. The solutions to x‚â•4 are
represented as \[ 4,‚àû ). This is perhaps the most useful method, as it
applies to concepts studied later in this course and to other
higher-level math courses.

The main concept to remember is that parentheses represent solutions
greater or less than the number, and brackets represent solutions that
are greater than or equal to or less than or equal to the number. Use
parentheses to represent infinity or negative infinity, since positive
and negative infinity are not numbers in the usual sense of the word
and, therefore, cannot be "equaled." A few examples of an interval, or a
set of numbers in which a solution falls, are \[ ‚àí2,6 ), or all numbers
between ‚àí2 and 6, including ‚àí2, but not including 6; ( ‚àí1,0 ), all real
numbers between, but not including ‚àí1 and 0; and ( ‚àí‚àû,1 \], all real
numbers less than and including 1. [\#](#) outlines the possibilities.

  Set Indicated                                                        Set-Builder Notation          Interval Notation
  -------------------------------------------------------------------- ----------------------------- -------------------
  All real numbers between *a* and *b*, but not including *a* or *b*   { x\|a\<x\<b }                ( a,b )
  All real numbers greater than *a*, but not including *a*             { x\|x\>a }                   ( a,‚àû )
  All real numbers less than *b*, but not including *b*                { x\|x\<b }                   ( ‚àí‚àû,b )
  All real numbers greater than *a*, including *a*                     { x\|x‚â•a }                    \[ a,‚àû )
  All real numbers less than *b*, including *b*                        { x\|x‚â§b }                    ( ‚àí‚àû,b \]
  All real numbers between *a* and *b*, including *a*                  { x\|a‚â§x\<b }                 \[ a,b )
  All real numbers between *a* and *b*, including *b*                  { x\|a\<x‚â§b }                 ( a,b \]
  All real numbers between *a* and *b*, including *a* and *b*          { x\|a‚â§x‚â§b }                  \[ a,b \]
  All real numbers less than *a* or greater than *b*                   { x\|x\<aorx\>b }             ( ‚àí‚àû,a )‚à™( b,‚àû )
  All real numbers                                                     { x\|xis all real numbers }   ( ‚àí‚àû,‚àû )

::: {#Example_02_07_01 .example}
Use interval notation to indicate all real numbers greater than or equal
to ‚àí2.

Use a bracket on the left of ‚àí2 and parentheses after infinity: \[ ‚àí2,‚àû
). The bracket indicates that ‚àí2 is included in the set with all real
numbers greater than ‚àí2 to infinity.
:::

:::: {#fs-id2383200 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Use interval notation to indicate all real numbers between and including
‚àí3 and 5.

\[ ‚àí3,5 \]
::::

::: {#Example_02_07_02 .example}
Write the interval expressing all real numbers less than or equal to ‚àí1
or greater than or equal to 1.

We have to write two intervals for this example. The first interval must
indicate all real numbers less than or equal to 1. So, this interval
begins at ‚àí‚àû and ends at ‚àí1, which is written as ( ‚àí‚àû,‚àí1 \].

The second interval must show all real numbers greater than or equal to
1, which is written as \[ 1,‚àû ). However, we want to combine these two
sets. We accomplish this by inserting the union symbol, ‚à™, between the
two intervals.

$$\left( {- \infty,-1} \right\rbrack \cup \left\lbrack {1,\infty} \right)$$
:::

:::: {#fs-id1592740 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Express all real numbers less than ‚àí2 or greater than or equal to 3 in
interval notation.

( ‚àí‚àû,‚àí2 )‚à™\[ 3,‚àû )
::::

# Using the Properties of Inequalities {#fs-id2734136}

When we work with inequalities, we can usually treat them similarly to
but not exactly as we treat equalities. We can use the addition property
and the multiplication property to help us solve them. The one exception
is when we multiply or divide by a negative number; doing so reverses
the inequality symbol.

:::: {#fs-id2425325 .note}
::: title
Properties of Inequalities
:::

A General Note

$$\begin{array}{ll}
{\mathbf{Addition}\mathbf{Property}} & {\qquad\text{If} a < b,\text{then} a + c < b + c.} \\
 & \\
{\mathbf{Multiplication}\mathbf{Property}} & {\qquad\text{If} a < b\mspace{9mu}\text{and}\mspace{9mu} c > 0,\text{then} ac < bc.} \\
 & {\qquad\text{If} a < b\mspace{9mu}\text{and}\mspace{9mu} c < 0,\text{then} ac > bc.}
\end{array}$$

These properties also apply to a‚â§b, a\>b, and a‚â•b.
::::

::: {#Example_02_07_03 .example}
Illustrate the addition property for inequalities by solving each of the
following:

‚ìê

x

‚àí

15

\<

4

‚ìë

6

‚â•

x

‚àí

1

‚ìí

x

\+

7

\>

9

The addition property for inequalities states that if an inequality
exists, adding or subtracting the same number on both sides does not
change the inequality.

‚ìê

x

‚àí

15

\<

4

x

‚àí

15

\+

15

\<

4

\+

15

Add 15 to both sides

.

x

\<

19

‚ìë

6

‚â•

x

‚àí

1

6

\+

1

‚â•

x

‚àí

1

\+

1

Add 1 to both sides

.

7

‚â•

x

‚ìí

x

\+

7

\>

9

x

\+

7

‚àí

7

\>

9

‚àí

7

Subtract 7 from both sides

.

x

\>

2
:::

:::: {#fs-id2269039 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Solve: 3x‚àí2\<1.

x\<1
::::

::: {#Example_02_07_04 .example}
Illustrate the multiplication property for inequalities by solving each
of the following:

‚ìê

3

x

\<

6

‚ìë

‚àí2

x

‚àí

1

‚â•

5

‚ìí

5

‚àí

x

\>

10

‚ìê

3

x

\<

6

1

3

(

3

x

)

\<

(

6

)

1

3

x

\<

2

‚ìë

‚àí

2

x

‚àí

1

‚â•

5

‚àí

2

x

‚â•

6

(

‚àí

1

2

)

(

‚àí

2

x

)

‚â•

(

6

)

(

‚àí

1

2

)

Multiply by

‚àí

1

2

.

x

‚â§

‚àí

3

Reverse the inequality

.

‚ìí

5

‚àí

x

\>

10

‚àí

x

\>

5

(

‚àí

1

)

(

‚àí

x

)

\>

(

5

)

(

‚àí

1

)

Multiply by

‚àí

1\.

x

\<

‚àí

5

Reverse the inequality

.
:::

:::: {#fs-id1730534 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Solve: 4x+7‚â•2x‚àí3.

x‚â•‚àí5
::::

# Solving Inequalities in One Variable Algebraically {#fs-id1249131}

As the examples have shown, we can perform the same operations on both
sides of an inequality, just as we do with equations; we combine like
terms and perform operations. To solve, we isolate the variable.

::: {#Example_02_07_05 .example}
Solve the inequality: 13‚àí7x‚â•10x‚àí4.

Solving this inequality is similar to solving an equation up until the
last step.

$$\begin{array}{ll}
{ 13 - 7x \geq 10x - 4} & \\
{13 - 17x \geq -4} & {\qquad\text{Move variable terms to one side of the inequality}.} \\
{\mspace{32mu}-17x \geq -17} & {\qquad\text{Isolate the variable term}.} \\
{\mspace{56mu} x \leq 1} & {\qquad\text{Dividing both sides by}-17\text{reverses the inequality}.}
\end{array}$$

The solution set is given by the interval ( ‚àí‚àû,1 \], or all real numbers
less than and including 1.
:::

:::: {#fs-id1572093 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Solve the inequality and write the answer using interval notation:
‚àíx+4\< 1 2 x+1.

( 2,‚àû )
::::

::: {#Example_02_07_06 .example}
Solve the following inequality and write the answer in interval
notation: ‚àí 3 4 x‚â•‚àí 5 8 + 2 3 x.

We begin solving in the same way we do when solving an equation.

$$\begin{array}{ll}
{\mspace{50mu} - \frac{3}{4}x \geq - \frac{5}{8} + \frac{2}{3}x} & \\
{ - \frac{3}{4}x - \frac{2}{3}x \geq - \frac{5}{8}} & {\qquad\text{Put variable terms on one side}.} \\
{- \frac{9}{12}x - \frac{8}{12}x \geq - \frac{5}{8}} & {\qquad\text{Write fractions with common denominator}.} \\
{\mspace{45mu} - \frac{17}{12}x \geq - \frac{5}{8}} & \\
{\mspace{76mu} x \leq - \frac{5}{8}\left( {- \frac{12}{17}} \right)} & {\qquad\text{Multiplying by a negative number reverses the inequality}.} \\
{\mspace{76mu} x \leq \frac{15}{34}} & 
\end{array}$$

The solution set is the interval ( ‚àí‚àû, 15 34 \].
:::

:::: {#fs-id2497523 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Solve the inequality and write the answer in interval notation: ‚àí 5 6 x‚â§
3 4 + 8 3 x.

\[ ‚àí 3 14 ,‚àû )
::::

# Understanding Compound Inequalities {#fs-id2947575}

A compound inequality includes two inequalities in one statement. A
statement such as 4\<x‚â§6 means 4\<x and x‚â§6. There are two ways to solve
compound inequalities: separating them into two separate inequalities or
leaving the compound inequality intact and performing operations on all
three parts at the same time. We will illustrate both methods.

::: {#Example_02_07_07 .example}
Solve the compound inequality: 3‚â§2x+2\<6.

The first method is to write two separate inequalities: 3‚â§2x+2 and
2x+2\<6. We solve them independently.

$$\begin{array}{lll}
{3 \leq 2x + 2} & {\qquad\text{and}\qquad} & {2x + 2 < 6} \\
{1 \leq 2x} & & {\qquad 2x < 4} \\
{\frac{1}{2} \leq x} & & {\qquad x < 2}
\end{array}$$

Then, we can rewrite the solution as a compound inequality, the same way
the problem began.

$$\frac{1}{2} \leq x < 2$$

In interval notation, the solution is written as \[ 1 2 ,2 ).

The second method is to leave the compound inequality intact, and
perform solving procedures on the three parts at the same time.

$$\begin{array}{ll}
{3 \leq 2x + 2 < 6} & \\
{1 \leq 2x < 4} & {\qquad\text{Isolate the variable term, and subtract 2 from all three parts}.} \\
{\frac{1}{2} \leq x < 2} & {\qquad\text{Divide through all three parts by 2}.}
\end{array}$$

We get the same solution: \[ 1 2 ,2 ).
:::

:::: {#fs-id1215697 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Solve the compound inequality: 4\<2x‚àí8‚â§10.

6\<x‚â§9‚Äãor( 6,9 \]
::::

::: {#Example_02_07_08 .example}
Solve the compound inequality with variables in all three parts:
3+x\>7x‚àí2\>5x‚àí10.

Let\'s try the first method. Write two inequalities*:*

$$\begin{array}{lll}
{3 + x > 7x - 2} & {\qquad\text{and}\qquad} & {7x - 2 > 5x - 10} \\
{\mspace{22mu} 3 > 6x - 2} & & {2x - 2 > -10} \\
{\mspace{22mu} 5 > 6x} & & {\mspace{32mu} 2x > -8} \\
{\mspace{22mu}\frac{5}{6} > x} & & {\mspace{45mu} x > -4} \\
{\mspace{23mu} x < \frac{5}{6}} & & {\mspace{27mu}-4 < x}
\end{array}$$

The solution set is ‚àí4\<x\< 5 6 or in interval notation ( ‚àí4, 5 6 ).
Notice that when we write the solution in interval notation, the smaller
number comes first. We read intervals from left to right, as they appear
on a number line. See [\#](#)*.*

<figure id="Figure_02_07_003">

</figure>
:::

:::: {#fs-id2700910 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Solve the compound inequality: 3y\<4‚àí5y\<5+3y.

( ‚àí 1 8 , 1 2 )
::::

# Solving Absolute Value Inequalities {#fs-id1161758}

As we know, the absolute value of a quantity is a positive number or
zero. From the origin, a point located at ( ‚àíx,0 ) has an absolute value
of x, as it is *x* units away. Consider absolute value as the distance
from one point to another point. Regardless of direction, positive or
negative, the distance between the two points is represented as a
positive number or zero.

An absolute value inequality is an equation of the form

$$\left| A \middle| < B,\mspace{9mu} \middle| A \middle| \leq B,\mspace{9mu}\mspace{9mu} \middle| A \middle| > B,\mspace{9mu}\text{or}\mspace{9mu}\mspace{9mu} \middle| A \middle| \geq B, \right.$$

Where *A*, and sometimes *B*, represents an algebraic expression
dependent on a variable *x.* Solving the inequality means finding the
set of all x *-*values that satisfy the problem. Usually this set will
be an interval or the union of two intervals and will include a range of
values.

There are two basic approaches to solving absolute value inequalities:
graphical and algebraic. The advantage of the graphical approach is we
can read the solution by interpreting the graphs of two equations. The
advantage of the algebraic approach is that solutions are exact, as
precise solutions are sometimes difficult to read from a graph.

Suppose we want to know all possible returns on an investment if we
could earn some amount of money within \$200 of \$600. We can solve
algebraically for the set of *x-*values such that the distance between x
and 600 is less than or equal to 200. We represent the distance between
x and 600 as \| x‚àí600 \|, and therefore, \| x‚àí600 \|‚â§200 or

$$\begin{matrix}
{-200 \leq x - 600 \leq 200} \\
{-200 + 600 \leq x - 600 + 600 \leq 200 + 600} \\
{400 \leq x \leq 800}
\end{matrix}$$

This means our returns would be between \$400 and \$800.

To solve absolute value inequalities, just as with absolute value
equations, we write two inequalities and then solve them independently.

:::: {#fs-id2930959 .note}
::: title
Absolute Value Inequalities
:::

A General Note

For an algebraic expression *X,* and k\>0, an absolute value inequality
is an inequality of the form

$$\begin{array}{l}
{|X| < k\text{is equivalent to~} - k < X < k} \\
{|X| > k\text{is equivalent to~}X < - k\text{or~}X > k}
\end{array}$$

These statements also apply to \| X \|‚â§k and \| X \|‚â•k.
::::

::: {#Example_02_07_09 .example}
Describe all values x within a distance of 4 from the number 5.

We want the distance between x and 5 to be less than or equal to 4. We
can draw a number line, such as in [\#](#)*,* to represent the condition
to be satisfied.

<figure id="Figure_02_07_004">

</figure>

The distance from x to 5 can be represented using an absolute value
symbol, \| x‚àí5 \|. Write the values of x that satisfy the condition as
an absolute value inequality.

$$\left| {x - 5} \right| \leq 4$$

We need to write two inequalities as there are always two solutions to
an absolute value equation.

$$\begin{array}{lll}
{x - 5 \leq 4} & {\qquad\text{and}\qquad} & {x - 5 \geq - 4} \\
{\mspace{32mu} x \leq 9} & & {\mspace{32mu} x \geq 1}
\end{array}$$

If the solution set is x‚â§9 and x‚â•1, then the solution set is an interval
including all real numbers between and including 1 and 9.

So \| x‚àí5 \|‚â§4 is equivalent to \[ 1,9 \] in interval notation.
:::

:::: {#fs-id2957557 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Describe all *x-*values within a distance of 3 from the number 2.

\| x‚àí2 \|‚â§3
::::

::: {#Example_02_07_10 .example}
Solve \| x‚àí1 \|‚â§3 .

$$\begin{array}{l}
\left| x - 1 \middle| \leq 3 \right. \\
 \\
{-3 \leq x - 1 \leq 3} \\
 \\
{-2 \leq x \leq 4} \\
 \\
{\lbrack-2,4\rbrack}
\end{array}$$
:::

::: {#Example_02_07_11 .example}
Given the equation y=‚àí 1 2 \| 4x‚àí5 \|+3, determine the *x*-values for
which the *y*-values are negative.

We are trying to determine where y\<0, which is when ‚àí 1 2 \| 4x‚àí5
\|+3\<0. We begin by isolating the absolute value.

$$\begin{array}{ll}
\left. - \frac{1}{2} \middle| 4x - 5 \middle| < - 3 \right. & {\qquad\text{Multiply both sides by ‚Äì2, and reverse the inequality}.} \\
{\mspace{27mu}\left| 4x - 5 \middle| > 6 \right.} & 
\end{array}$$

Next, we solve for the equality \| 4x‚àí5 \|=6.

$$\begin{array}{lll}
{4x - 5 = 6} & & {4x - 5 = - 6} \\
{\mspace{34mu} 4x = 11} & {\qquad\text{or}\qquad} & {\mspace{34mu} 4x = - 1} \\
{\qquad x = \frac{11}{4}} & & {\qquad x = - \frac{1}{4}}
\end{array}$$

Now, we can examine the graph to observe where the *y-*values are
negative. We observe where the branches are below the *x-*axis. Notice
that it is not important exactly what the graph looks like, as long as
we know that it crosses the horizontal axis at x=‚àí 1 4 and x= 11 4 , and
that the graph opens downward. See [\#](#)*.*

<figure id="Figure_02_07_007">

</figure>
:::

:::: {#fs-id1969441 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Solve ‚àí2\| k‚àí4 \|‚â§‚àí6.

k‚â§1 or k‚â•7; in interval notation, this would be (‚àí‚àû,1\]‚à™\[7,‚àû).
::::

:::: {#fs-id1904611 .note}
::: title
:::

Media

Access these online resources for additional instruction and practice
with linear inequalities and absolute value inequalities.

Interval notation

How to solve linear inequalities

How to solve an inequality

Absolute value equations

Compound inequalities

Absolute value inequalities
::::

# Key Concepts {#fs-id1801568}

Interval notation is a method to indicate the solution set to an
inequality. Highly applicable in calculus, it is a system of parentheses
and brackets that indicate what numbers are included in a set and
whether the endpoints are included as well. See

and

.

Solving inequalities is similar to solving equations. The same algebraic
rules apply, except for one: multiplying or dividing by a negative
number reverses the inequality. See

,

,

, and

.

Compound inequalities often have three parts and can be rewritten as two
independent inequalities. Solutions are given by boundary values, which
are indicated as a beginning boundary or an ending boundary in the
solutions to the two inequalities. See

and

.

Absolute value inequalities will produce two solution sets due to the
nature of absolute value. We solve by writing two equations: one equal
to a positive value and one equal to a negative value. See

and

.

Absolute value inequalities can also be solved by graphing. At least we
can check the algebraic solutions by graphing, as we cannot depend on a
visual for a precise solution. See

.

# Section Exercises {#fs-id2529020}

## Verbal {#fs-id1901196}

When solving an inequality, explain what happened from Step 1 to Step 2:

Step 1 ‚àí2x\>6 Step 2 x\<‚àí3

When we divide both sides by a negative it changes the sign of both
sides so the sense of the inequality sign changes.

When solving an inequality, we arrive at:

x+2\<x+3 2\<3

Explain what our solution set is.

When writing our solution in interval notation, how do we represent all
the real numbers?

( ‚àí‚àû,‚àû )

When solving an inequality, we arrive at:

x+2\>x+3 2\>3

Explain what our solution set is.

Describe how to graph y=\| x‚àí3 \|

We start by finding the *x*-intercept, or where the function = 0. Once
we have that point, which is (3,0), we graph to the right the straight
line graph y=x‚àí3, and then when we draw it to the left we plot positive
*y* values, taking the absolute value of them.

## Algebraic {#fs-id2925477}

For the following exercises, solve the inequality. Write your final
answer in interval notation.

4x‚àí7‚â§9

3x+2‚â•7x‚àí1

( ‚àí‚àû, 3 4 \]

‚àí2x+3\>x‚àí5

4(x+3)‚â•2x‚àí1

\[ ‚àí 13 2 ,‚àû )

‚àí 1 2 x‚â§‚àí 5 4 + 2 5 x

‚àí5(x‚àí1)+3\>3x‚àí4‚àí4x

( ‚àí‚àû,3 )

‚àí3(2x+1)\>‚àí2(x+4)

x+3 8 ‚àí x+5 5 ‚â• 3 10

( ‚àí‚àû,‚àí 37 3 \]

x‚àí1 3 + x+2 5 ‚â§ 3 5

For the following exercises, solve the inequality involving absolute
value. Write your final answer in interval notation.

\| x+9 \|‚â•‚àí6

All real numbers ( ‚àí‚àû,‚àû )

\| 2x+3 \|\<7

\|3x‚àí1\|\>11

( ‚àí‚àû,‚àí 10 3 )‚à™( 4,‚àû )

\| 2x+1 \|+1‚â§6

\| x‚àí2 \|+4‚â•10

( ‚àí‚àû,‚àí4 \]‚à™\[ 8,+‚àû )

\| ‚àí2x+7 \|‚â§13

\|x‚àí7\|\<‚àí4

No solution

\|x‚àí20\|\>‚àí1

\| x‚àí3 4 \|\<2

( ‚àí5,11 )

For the following exercises, describe all the *x*-values within or
including a distance of the given values.

Distance of 5 units from the number 7

Distance of 3 units from the number 9

\[ 6,12 \]

Distance of 10 units from the number 4

Distance of 11 units from the number 1

\[ ‚àí10,12 \]

For the following exercises, solve the compound inequality. Express your
answer using inequality signs, and then write your answer using interval
notation.

‚àí4\<3x+2‚â§18

3x+1\>2x‚àí5\>x‚àí7

x\>‚àí6andx\>‚àí2 Take the intersection of two sets. x\>‚àí2,‚ÄÉ(‚àí2,+‚àû)

3y\<5‚àí2y\<7+y

2x‚àí5\<‚àí11or 5x+1‚â•6

x\<‚àí3‚ÄÉor‚ÄÉx‚â•1 Take the union of the two sets. (‚àí‚àû,‚àí3) ‚à™ ‚Äã ‚Äã \[1,‚àû)

x+7\<x+2

## Graphical {#fs-id1779700}

For the following exercises, graph the function. Observe the points of
intersection and shade the *x*-axis representing the solution set to the
inequality. Show your graph and write your final answer in interval
notation.

\|x‚àí1\|\>2

( ‚àí‚àû,‚àí1 )‚à™( 3,‚àû )

\| x+3 \|‚â•5

\| x+7 \|‚â§4

\[ ‚àí11,‚àí3 \]

\| x‚àí2 \|\<7

\| x‚àí2 \|\<0

It is never less than zero. No solution.

For the following exercises, graph both straight lines (left-hand side
being y1 and right-hand side being y2) on the same axes. Find the point
of intersection and solve the inequality by observing where it is true
comparing the *y*-values of the lines.

x+3\<3x‚àí4

x‚àí2\>2x+1

Where the blue line is above the orange line; point of intersection is
x=‚àí3.

( ‚àí‚àû,‚àí3 )

x+1\>x+4

1 2 x+1\> 1 2 x‚àí5

Where the blue line is above the orange line; always. All real numbers.

(‚àí‚àû,‚àí‚àû)

4x+1\< 1 2 x+3

## Numeric {#fs-id3071965}

For the following exercises, write the set in interval notation.

{ x\| ‚àí1\<x\<3 }

( ‚àí1,3 )

{ x\| x‚â•7 }

{ x\| x\<4 }

( ‚àí‚àû,4 )

{ x\| xis all real numbers }

For the following exercises, write the interval in set-builder notation.

( ‚àí‚àû,6 )

{ x\| x\<6 }

( 4,‚àû )

\[‚àí3,5)

{ x\| ‚àí3‚â§x\<5 }

\[‚àí4,1\]‚à™\[9,‚àû)

For the following exercises, write the set of numbers represented on the
number line in interval notation.

( ‚àí2,1 \]

( ‚àí‚àû,4 \]

## Technology {#fs-id2519914}

For the following exercises, input the left-hand side of the inequality
as a Y1 graph in your graphing utility. Enter y2 = the right-hand side.
Entering the absolute value of an expression is found in the MATH menu,
Num, 1:abs(. Find the points of intersection, recall (2nd CALC
5:intersection, 1st curve, enter, 2nd curve, enter, guess, enter). Copy
a sketch of the graph and shade the *x*-axis for your solution set to
the inequality. Write final answers in interval notation.

\| x+2 \|‚àí5\<2

‚àí1 2 \| x+2 \|\<4

Where the blue is below the orange; always. All real numbers. (‚àí‚àû,+‚àû).

\| 4x+1 \|‚àí3\>2

\| x‚àí4 \|\<3

Where the blue is below the orange; ( 1,7 ).

\| x+2 \|‚â•5

## Extensions {#fs-id2663030}

Solve \| 3x+1 \|=\| 2x+3 \|

x=2, ‚àí4 5

Solve x 2 ‚àíx\>12

x‚àí5 x+7 ‚â§0, x‚âÝ‚àí7

( ‚àí7,5 \]

p=‚àí x 2 +130x‚àí3000 is a profit formula for a small business. Find the
set of *x*-values that will keep this profit positive.

## Real-World Applications {#fs-id2791668}

In chemistry the volume for a certain gas is given by V=20T, where *V*
is measured in cc and *T* is temperature in ¬∫C. If the temperature
varies between 80¬∫C and 120¬∫C, find the set of volume values.

80‚â§T‚â§120 1,600‚â§20T‚â§2,400

\[ 1,600, 2,400 \]

A basic cellular package costs \$20/mo. for 60 min of calling, with an
additional charge of \$.30/min beyond that time.. The cost formula would
be C=20+.30(x‚àí60). If you have to keep your bill no greater than \$50,
what is the maximum calling minutes you can use?

# Chapter Review Exercises {#fs-id1676900}

## [The Rectangular Coordinate Systems and Graphs](#) {#fs-id1676906}

For the following exercises, find the *x*-intercept and the
*y*-intercept without graphing.

4x‚àí3y=12

*x*-intercept: ( 3,0 ); *y*-intercept: ( 0,‚àí4 )

2y‚àí4=3x

For the following exercises, solve for *y* in terms of *x*, putting the
equation in slope--intercept form.

5x=3y‚àí12

y= 5 3 x+4

2x‚àí5y=7

For the following exercises, find the distance between the two points.

( ‚àí2,5 )( 4,‚àí1 )

72 =6 2

( ‚àí12,‚àí3 )( ‚àí1,5 )

Find the distance between the two points (‚àí71,432) and (511,218) using
your calculator, and round your answer to the nearest thousandth.

620.097

For the following exercises, find the coordinates of the midpoint of the
line segment that joins the two given points.

( ‚àí1,5 ) and ( 4,6 )

( ‚àí13,5 ) and ( 17,18 )

midpoint is ( 2, 23 2 )

For the following exercises, construct a table and graph the equation by
plotting at least three points.

y= 1 2 x+4

4x‚àí3y=6

  ----- -----
  *x*   *y*
  0     ‚àí2
  3     2
  6     6
  ----- -----

## [Linear Equations in One Variable](#) {#fs-id2442057}

For the following exercises, solve for x.

5x+2=7x‚àí8

3(x+2)‚àí10=x+4

x=4

7x‚àí3=5

12‚àí5(x+1)=2x‚àí5

x= 12 7

2x 3 ‚àí 3 4 = x 6 + 21 4

For the following exercises, solve for x. State all *x*-values that are
excluded from the solution set.

x x 2 ‚àí9 + 4 x+3 = 3 x 2 ‚àí9 x‚âÝ3,‚àí3

No solution

1 2 + 2 x = 3 4

For the following exercises, find the equation of the line using the
point-slope formula.

Passes through these two points: ( ‚àí2,1 ),( 4,2 ).

y= 1 6 x+ 4 3

Passes through the point ( ‚àí3,4 ) and has a slope of ‚àí 1 3 .

Passes through the point ( ‚àí3,4 ) and is parallel to the graph y= 2 3
x+5.

y= 2 3 x+6

Passes through these two points: ( 5,1 ),( 5,7 ).

## [Models and Applications](#) {#fs-id1526011}

For the following exercises, write and solve an equation to answer each
question.

The number of male fish in the tank is five more than three times the
number of females. If the total number of fish is 73, how many of each
sex are in the tank?

females 17, males 56

A landscaper has 72 ft. of fencing to put around a rectangular garden.
If the length is 3 times the width, find the dimensions of the garden.

A truck rental is \$25 plus \$.30/mi. Find out how many miles Ken
traveled if his bill was \$50.20.

84 mi

## [Complex Numbers](#) {#fs-id1526052}

For the following exercises, use the quadratic equation to solve.

x 2 ‚àí5x+9=0

2 x 2 +3x+7=0

x=‚àí 3 4 ¬± i 47 4

For the following exercises, name the horizontal component and the
vertical component.

4‚àí3i

‚àí2‚àíi

horizontal component ‚àí2; vertical component ‚àí1

For the following exercises, perform the operations indicated.

( 9‚àíi )‚àí( 4‚àí7i )

( 2+3i )‚àí( ‚àí5‚àí8i )

7+11i

2 ‚àí75 +3 25

‚àí16 +4 ‚àí9

16i

‚àí6i(i‚àí5)

(3‚àí5i) 2

‚àí16‚àí30i

‚àí4 ¬∑ ‚àí12

‚àí2 ( ‚àí8 ‚àí 5 )

‚àí4‚àíi 10

2 5‚àí3i

3+7i i

x=7‚àí3i

## [Quadratic Equations](#) {#fs-id2049622}

For the following exercises, solve the quadratic equation by factoring.

2 x 2 ‚àí7x‚àí4=0

3 x 2 +18x+15=0

x=‚àí1,‚àí5

25 x 2 ‚àí9=0

7 x 2 ‚àí9x=0

x=0, 9 7

For the following exercises, solve the quadratic equation by using the
square-root property.

x 2 =49

( x‚àí4 ) 2 =36

x=10,‚àí2

For the following exercises, solve the quadratic equation by completing
the square.

x 2 +8x‚àí5=0

4 x 2 +2x‚àí1=0

x= ‚àí1¬± 5 4

For the following exercises, solve the quadratic equation by using the
quadratic formula. If the solutions are not real, state *No real
solution*.

2 x 2 ‚àí5x+1=0

15 x 2 ‚àíx‚àí2=0

x= 2 5 , ‚àí1 3

For the following exercises, solve the quadratic equation by the method
of your choice.

(x‚àí2) 2 =16

x 2 =10x+3

x=5¬±2 7

## [Other Types of Equations](#) {#fs-id2268710}

For the following exercises, solve the equations.

x 3 2 =27

x 1 2 ‚àí4 x 1 4 =0

x=0,256

4 x 3 +8 x 2 ‚àí9x‚àí18=0

3 x 5 ‚àí6 x 3 =0

x=0,¬± 2

x+9 =x‚àí3

3x+7 + x+2 =1

x=‚àí2

\| 3x‚àí7 \|=5

\| 2x+3 \|‚àí5=9

x= 11 2 , ‚àí17 2

## [Linear Inequalities and Absolute Value Inequalities](#) {#fs-id1555859}

For the following exercises, solve the inequality. Write your final
answer in interval notation.

5x‚àí8‚â§12

‚àí2x+5\>x‚àí7

( ‚àí‚àû,4 )

x‚àí1 3 + x+2 5 ‚â§ 3 5

\| 3x+2 \|+1‚â§9

\[ ‚àí10 3 ,2 \]

\| 5x‚àí1 \|\>14

\| x‚àí3 \|\<‚àí4

No solution

For the following exercises, solve the compound inequality. Write your
answer in interval notation.

‚àí4\<3x+2‚â§18

3y\<1‚àí2y\<5+y

( ‚àí 4 3 , 1 5 )

For the following exercises, graph as described.

Graph the absolute value function and graph the constant function.
Observe the points of intersection and shade the *x*-axis representing
the solution set to the inequality. Show your graph and write your final
answer in interval notation.

\| x+3 \|‚â•5

Graph both straight lines (left-hand side being y1 and right-hand side
being y2) on the same axes. Find the point of intersection and solve the
inequality by observing where it is true comparing the *y*-values of the
lines. See the interval where the inequality is true.

x+3\<3x‚àí4

Where the blue is below the orange line; point of intersection is x=3.5.

( 3.5,‚àû )

# Chapter Practice Test {#fs-id3220222}

Graph the following: 2y=3x+4.

y= 3 2 x+2

  *x*   *y*
  ----- -----
  0     2
  2     5
  4     8

Find the *x-* and *y*-intercepts for the following: 2x‚àí5y=6

Find the *x-* and *y*-intercepts of this equation, and sketch the graph
of the line using just the intercepts plotted.

3x‚àí4y=12

( 0,‚àí3 ) ( 4,0 )

Find the exact distance between ( 5,‚àí3 ) and ( ‚àí2,8 ). Find the
coordinates of the midpoint of the line segment joining the two points.

Write the interval notation for the set of numbers represented by { x\|
x‚â§9 }.

( ‚àí‚àû,9 \]

Solve for *x*: 5x+8=3x‚àí10.

Solve for x: 3( 2x‚àí5 )‚àí3( x‚àí7 )=2x‚àí9.

x=‚àí15

Solve for *x*: x 2 +1= 4 x

Solve for *x*: 5 x+4 =4+ 3 x‚àí2 .

x‚âÝ‚àí4,2; x= ‚àí5 2 ,1

The perimeter of a triangle is 30 in. The longest side is 2 less than 3
times the shortest side and the other side is 2 more than twice the
shortest side. Find the length of each side.

Solve for *x*. Write the answer in simplest radical form.

x 2 3 ‚àíx=- 1 2

x= 3¬± 3 2

Solve: 3x‚àí8‚â§4.

Solve: \| 2x+3 \|\<5.

( ‚àí4,1 )

Solve: \| 3x‚àí2 \|‚â•4.

For the following exercises, find the equation of the line with the
given information.

Passes through the points ( ‚àí4,2 ) and ( 5,‚àí3 ).

y= ‚àí5 9 x‚àí 2 9

Has an undefined slope and passes through the point ( 4,3 ).

Passes through the point ( 2,1 ) and is perpendicular to y=‚àí 2 5 x+3.

y= 5 2 x‚àí4

Add these complex numbers: (3‚àí2i)+(4‚àíi).

Simplify: ‚àí4 +3 ‚àí16 .

14i

Multiply: 5i( 5‚àí3i ).

Divide: 4‚àíi 2+3i .

5 13 ‚àí 14 13 i

Solve this quadratic equation and write the two complex roots in a+bi
form: x 2 ‚àí4x+7=0.

Solve: ( 3x‚àí1 ) 2 ‚àí1=24.

x=2, ‚àí4 3

Solve: x 2 ‚àí6x=13.

Solve: 4 x 2 ‚àí4x‚àí1=0

x= 1 2 ¬± 2 2

Solve: x‚àí7 =x‚àí7

Solve: 2+ 12‚àí2x =x

4

Solve: ( x‚àí1 ) 2 3 =9

For the following exercises, find the real solutions of each equation by
factoring.

2 x 3 ‚àí x 2 ‚àí8x+4=0

x= 1 2 ,2,‚àí2

( x+5 ) 2 ‚àí3( x+5 )‚àí4=0

# 

compound inequality

a problem or a statement that includes two inequalities

interval

an interval describes a set of numbers within which a solution falls

interval notation

a mathematical statement that describes a solution set and uses
parentheses or brackets to indicate where an interval begins and ends

linear inequality

similar to a linear equation except that the solutions will include sets
of numbers
