m49444

> In this section, you will:
>
> Write the terms of a sequence defined by an explicit formula.
>
> Write the terms of a sequence defined by a recursive formula.
>
> Use factorial notation.

f51b97a1-9732-412b-a1bf-237bacd33938

#  {#eip-909}

## Learning Objectives {#eip-603}

Write the first few terms of a sequence (IA 12.1.1)

Find a formula for the general term (nth term) of a sequence (IA 12.1.2)

## Objective 1: Write the first few terms of a sequence (IA 12.1.1). {#eip-165}

A patient takes a 30 mg antibiotic capsule. At the end of that hour, the
amount of antibiotic remaining in her body is only 90% of the amount in
the beginning of that hour. The 30mg dose is taken at time t = 1 hour.
How much of this dose remains at the end of 1 hour? 2hours? 3 hours? 4
hours?

  Time t   Dose remaining after time t
  -------- -----------------------------
  1        0.90(30)=27mg
  2        0.90(27)=24.3mg
  3        0.90(24.3)=21.87mg
  4        0.90(21.87)=19.68mg

This ordered list of numbers 27, 24.3, 21.87, 19.68, ... is a sequence.
Each number in the list is a term.

A sequence is a function whose domain is the counting numbers. A
sequence may have an infinite number of terms or a finite number of
terms. Our sequence has three dots (ellipsis) at the end which indicates
the list never ends. If the domain is the set of all counting numbers,
then the sequence is an infinite sequence.

Often when working with sequences we do not want to write out all the
terms. We want a more compact way to show how each term is defined. When
we worked with functions, we wrote f(x)=2x and we said the expression 2x
was the rule that defined values in the range.

While a sequence is a function, we do not use the usual function
notation. Instead of writing the function as f(x)=2x , we would write it
as an=2n . The an is the *n*th term of the sequence, the term in the
*n*th position where *n* is a value in the domain. The formula for
writing the nth term of the sequence is called the general term or
formula of the sequence.

General sequence terms are denoted as follows:
a1-first¬Ýterma2-second¬Ýterma3-third¬Ýterm\...an-nth¬Ýterman+1-(n+1)¬Ýterm\...

::: {#eip-223 .example}
Write the first five terms of the sequence whose general term is an=2n-7
.

n12345ana1a2a3a4a52n-72(1)-72(2)-72(3)-72(4)-72(5)-7-5-3-113
:::

### Practice Makes Perfect {#eip-52}

Write the first few terms of a sequence.

Write the first five terms of the sequence whose general term is
an=4n+2.

  ------ ---- ---- ---- ---- ----
  n      1    2    3    4    5
  an     a1   a2   a3   a4   a5
  4n+2                       
                             
  ------ ---- ---- ---- ---- ----

Write the first five terms of the sequence whose general term is
an=3n--1.

  ------- ---- ---- ---- ---- ----
  n       1    2    3    4    5
  an      a1   a2   a3   a4   a5
  3n--1                       
                              
  ------- ---- ---- ---- ---- ----

## Objective 2: Find a formula for the general term (nth term) of a sequence (IA 12.1.2) {#eip-58}

Sometimes we have a few terms of a sequence and it would be helpful to
know the *general term or *n*th term*. To find the general term, we
*look for patterns in the terms*. Often the patterns involve multiples
or powers. We also look for a pattern in the signs of the terms.

::: {#eip-896 .example}
‚ìê

Find a general term for the sequence whose first five terms are shown
below:

4, 8, 12, 16, 20\...

‚ìë

Find a general term for the sequence whose first five terms are shown
below:

1

3

,

1

9

,

1

27

,

1

81

,

1

243

,

.

.

.

  ------------------------------------ --------
  ‚ìê                                    
                                       
  Look for a pattern in the terms      
  The numbers are all multiples of 4   
  The general term of the sequence:    an=4n.
  ------------------------------------ --------

  --------------------------------------------------------------- --------
  ‚ìë                                                               
                                                                  
  Look for a pattern in the terms.                                
  The numerators are all 1 and the denominators are powers of 3   
  The general term of the sequence:                               an=13n
  --------------------------------------------------------------- --------
:::

### Practice Makes Perfect {#eip-40}

Find a general term for the sequence whose first five terms are shown:8,
16, 24, 32, 40, \...

  -------------------------------------------------------------------- -----------------------------------------
                                                                       
  Look for a pattern in the terms                                      Terms: \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
  The general term of the sequence: \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_   
  -------------------------------------------------------------------- -----------------------------------------

Find a general term for the sequence whose first five terms are shown:
14,116,¬Ý164,¬Ý1256,¬Ý11024,¬Ý\...

  -------------------------------------------------------------------- -----------------------------------------
                                                                       
  Look for a pattern in the terms                                      Terms: \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
  The general term of the sequence: \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_   
  -------------------------------------------------------------------- -----------------------------------------

A video game company launches an exciting new advertising campaign. They
predict the number of online visits to their website, or hits, will
double each day. The model they are using shows 2 hits the first day, 4
hits the second day, 8 hits the third day, and so on. See [\#](#).

  --------------- --------- --------- --------- --------- --------- ---------
  *Day*           1         2         3         4         5         ...

  *Hits*          2         4         8         16        32        ...
  --------------- --------- --------- --------- --------- --------- ---------

If their model continues, how many hits will there be at the end of the
month? To answer this question, we'll first need to know how to
determine a list of numbers written in a specific order. In this
section, we will explore these kinds of ordered lists.

# Writing the Terms of a Sequence Defined by an Explicit Formula {#fs-id1165137571964}

One way to describe an ordered list of numbers is as a sequence. A
sequence is a function whose domain is a subset of the counting numbers.
The sequence established by the number of hits on the website is

$$\left\{ 2,4,8,16,32,\ldots \right\}.$$

The ellipsis (...) indicates that the sequence continues indefinitely.
Each number in the sequence is called a term. The first five terms of
this sequence are 2, 4, 8, 16, and 32.

Listing all of the terms for a sequence can be cumbersome. For example,
finding the number of hits on the website at the end of the month would
require listing out as many as 31 terms. A more efficient way to
determine a specific term is by writing a formula to define the
sequence.

One type of formula is an explicit formula, which defines the terms of a
sequence using their position in the sequence. Explicit formulas are
helpful if we want to find a specific term of a sequence without finding
all of the previous terms. We can use the formula to find the nth term
of the sequence, where n is any positive number. In our example, each
number in the sequence is double the previous number, so we can use
powers of 2 to write a formula for the nth term.

The first term of the sequence is 2 1 =2, the second term is 2 2 =4, the
third term is 2 3 =8, and so on. The nth term of the sequence can be
found by raising 2 to the nth power. An explicit formula for a sequence
is named by a lower case letter a,b,c\... with the subscript n. The
explicit formula for this sequence is

$$a_{n} = 2^{n}.$$

Now that we have a formula for the nth term of the sequence, we can
answer the question posed at the beginning of this section. We were
asked to find the number of hits at the end of the month, which we will
take to be 31 days. To find the number of hits on the last day of the
month, we need to find the 31st term of the sequence. We will substitute
31 for n in the formula.

$$\begin{array}{l}
{a_{31} = 2^{31}} \\
{\mspace{9mu}\text{~~~~~} = \text{2,147,483,648}}
\end{array}$$

If the doubling trend continues, the company will get 2,147,483,648 hits
on the last day of the month. That is over 2.1 billion hits! The huge
number is probably a little unrealistic because it does not take
consumer interest and competition into account. It does, however, give
the company a starting point from which to consider business decisions.

Another way to represent the sequence is by using a table. The first
five terms of the sequence and the nth term of the sequence are shown in
[\#](#).

  ----------------------------------- --- --- --- ---- ---- -----
  *n*                                 1   2   3   4    5    n
  *nth term of the sequence, a n*     2   4   8   16   32   2 n
  ----------------------------------- --- --- --- ---- ---- -----

Graphing provides a visual representation of the sequence as a set of
distinct points. We can see from the graph in [\#](#) that the number of
hits is rising at an exponential rate. This particular sequence forms an
exponential function.

<figure id="CNX_Precalculus_Figure_11_01_002">

</figure>

Lastly, we can write this particular sequence as

$$\left\{ 2,4,8,16,32,\ldots,2^{n},\ldots \right\}.$$

A sequence that continues indefinitely is called an *infinite sequence*.
The domain of an infinite sequence is the set of counting numbers. If we
consider only the first 10 terms of the sequence, we could write

$$\left\{ 2,4,8,16,32,\ldots,2^{n},\ldots,1024 \right\}.$$

This sequence is called a *finite sequence* because it does not continue
indefinitely.

:::: {#fs-id1165137831577 .note}
::: title
Sequence
:::

A sequence is a function whose domain is the set of positive integers. A
finite sequence is a sequence whose domain consists of only the first n
positive integers. The numbers in a sequence are called *terms*. The
variable a with a number subscript is used to represent the terms in a
sequence and to indicate the position of the term in the sequence.

$$a_{1},a_{2},a_{3},\ldots,a_{n},\ldots$$

We call a 1 the first term of the sequence, a 2 the second term of the
sequence, a 3 the third term of the sequence, and so on. The term a n is
called the nth term of the sequence, or the general term of the
sequence. An explicit formula defines the nth term of a sequence using
the position of the term. A sequence that continues indefinitely is an
infinite sequence.
::::

:::: {#fs-id1165135184176 .note}
::: title
:::

Q&A

*Does a sequence always have to begin with* a 1 ?

*No. In certain problems, it may be useful to define the initial term as
a 0 instead of a 1 . In these problems, the domain of the function
includes 0.*
::::

:::: {#fs-id1165135434913 .note}
::: title
:::

How To

*Given an explicit formula, write the first* n *terms of a sequence.*

Substitute each value of

n

into the formula. Begin with

n

=

1

to find the first term,

a

1

.

To find the second term,

a

2

,

use

n

=

2\.

Continue in the same manner until you have identified all

n

terms.
::::

::: {#Example_11_01_01 .example}
Write the first five terms of the sequence defined by the explicit
formula a n =‚àí3n+8.

Substitute n=1 into the formula. Repeat with values 2 through 5 for n.

$$\begin{array}{llllll}
{n = 1} & & & & & {a_{1} = - 3(1) + 8 = 5} \\
{n = 2} & & & & & {a_{2} = - 3(2) + 8 = 2} \\
{n = 3} & & & & & {a_{3} = - 3(3) + 8 = - 1} \\
{n = 4} & & & & & {a_{4} = - 3(4) + 8 = - 4} \\
{n = 5} & & & & & {a_{5} = - 3(5) + 8 = - 7}
\end{array}$$

The first five terms are {5,2,‚àí1,‚àí4,‚àí7}.

The sequence values can be listed in a table. A table, such as [\#](#),
is a convenient way to input the function into a graphing utility.

  --------------- ----------- ----------- ----------- ----------- -----------
  *n*             1           2           3           4           5

  *a n*           5           2           --1         --4         --7
  --------------- ----------- ----------- ----------- ----------- -----------

A graph can be made from this table of values. From the graph in
[\#](#), we can see that this sequence represents a linear function, but
notice the graph is not continuous because the domain is over the
positive integers only.

<figure id="CNX_Precalculus_Figure_11_01_003">

</figure>
:::

:::: {#ti_11_01_01 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Write the first five terms of the sequence defined by the explicit
formula t n =5n‚àí4.

The first five terms are { 1,6,¬Ý11,¬Ý16,¬Ý21 }.
::::

## Investigating Alternating Sequences {#fs-id1165135203710}

Sometimes sequences have terms that are alternate. In fact, the terms
may actually alternate in sign. The steps to finding terms of the
sequence are the same as if the signs did not alternate. However, the
resulting terms will not show increase or decrease as n increases. Let's
take a look at the following sequence.

$$\left\{ 2,-4,6,-8 \right\}$$

Notice the first term is greater than the second term, the second term
is less than the third term, and the third term is greater than the
fourth term. This trend continues forever. Do not rearrange the terms in
numerical order to interpret the sequence.

:::: {#fs-id1165137643043 .note}
::: title
:::

How To

*Given an explicit formula with alternating terms, write the first n
terms of a sequence.*

Substitute each value of

n

into the formula. Begin with

n

=

1

to find the first term,

a

1

.

The sign of the term is given by the

(

‚àí

1

)

n

in the explicit formula.

To find the second term,

a

2

,

use

n

=

2\.

Continue in the same manner until you have identified all

n

terms.
::::

::: {#Example_11_01_02 .example}
Write the first five terms of the sequence.

$$a_{n} = \frac{{( - 1)}^{n}n^{2}}{n + 1}$$

Substitute n=1, n=2, and so on in the formula.

$$\begin{array}{lll}
{n = 1} & \begin{array}{ll}
 & 
\end{array} & {a_{1} = \frac{{( - 1)}^{1}1^{2}}{1 + 1} = - \frac{1}{2}} \\
{n = 2} & \begin{array}{ll}
 & 
\end{array} & {a_{2} = \frac{{( - 1)}^{2}2^{2}}{2 + 1} = \frac{4}{3}} \\
{n = 3} & \begin{array}{ll}
 & 
\end{array} & {a_{3} = \frac{{( - 1)}^{3}3^{2}}{3 + 1} = - \frac{9}{4}} \\
{n = 4} & \begin{array}{ll}
 & 
\end{array} & {a_{4} = \frac{{( - 1)}^{4}4^{2}}{4 + 1} = \frac{16}{5}} \\
{n = 5} & & {a_{5} = \frac{{( - 1)}^{5}5^{2}}{5 + 1} = - \frac{25}{6}}
\end{array}$$

The first five terms are { ‚àí 1 2 , 4 3 ,‚àí 9 4 , 16 5 ,‚àí 25 6 }.

The graph of this function, shown in [\#](#), looks different from the
ones we have seen previously in this section because the terms of the
sequence alternate between positive and negative values.

<figure id="CNX_Precalculus_Figure_11_01_004">

</figure>
:::

:::: {#fs-id1165137891457 .note}
::: title
:::

Q&A

*In [\#](#), does the (--1) to the power of* n *account for the
oscillations of signs?*

*Yes, the power might be* n,n+1,n‚àí1, *and so on, but any odd powers will
result in a negative term, and any even power will result in a positive
term.*
::::

:::: {#fs-id1165135704013 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Write the first five terms of the sequence.

$$a_{n} = \frac{4n}{{( - 2)}^{n}}$$

The first five terms are { ‚àí2,¬Ý2,¬Ý‚àí 3 2 ,¬Ý1,‚àí 5 8 }.
::::

## Investigating Piecewise Explicit Formulas {#fs-id1165137736065}

We've learned that sequences are functions whose domain is over the
positive integers. This is true for other types of functions, including
some piecewise functions. Recall that a piecewise function is a function
defined by multiple subsections. A different formula might represent
each individual subsection.

:::: {#fs-id1165137667302 .note}
::: title
:::

How To

*Given an explicit formula for a piecewise function, write the first n
terms of a sequence*

Identify the formula to which

n

=

1

applies.

To find the first term,

a

1

,

use

n

=

1

in the appropriate formula.

Identify the formula to which

n

=

2

applies.

To find the second term,

a

2

,

use

n

=

2

in the appropriate formula.

Continue in the same manner until you have identified all

n

terms.
::::

::: {#Example_11_01_03 .example}
Write the first six terms of the sequence.

$$a_{n} = \begin{cases}
n^{2} & {\text{if~}n\mspace{9mu}\text{is~not~divisible~by~3}} \\
\frac{n}{3} & {\text{if~}n\mspace{9mu}\text{is~divisible~by~3}}
\end{cases}$$

Substitute n=1,n=2, and so on in the appropriate formula. Use n 2 when n
is not a multiple of 3. Use n 3 when n is a multiple of 3.

$$\begin{array}{ll}
{a_{1} = 1^{2} = 1\begin{array}{llll}
 & & & 
\end{array}} & {\text{1~is~not~a~multiple~of~3}\text{.~~Use~}n^{2}.} \\
{a_{2} = 2^{2} = 4} & {\text{2~is~not~a~multiple~of~3}\text{.~~Use~}n^{2}.} \\
{a_{3} = \frac{3}{3} = 1} & {\text{3~is~a~multiple~of~3}\text{.~~Use~}\frac{n}{3}.} \\
{a_{4} = 4^{2} = 16} & {\text{4~is~not~a~multiple~of~3}\text{.~~Use~}n^{2}.} \\
{a_{5} = 5^{2} = 25} & {\text{5~is~not~a~multiple~of~3}\text{.~~Use~}n^{2}.} \\
{a_{6} = \frac{6}{3} = 2} & {\text{6~is~a~multiple~of~3}\text{.~~Use~}\frac{n}{3}.}
\end{array}$$

The first six terms are { 1,4,1,16,25,2 }.

Every third point on the graph shown in [\#](#) stands out from the two
nearby points. This occurs because the sequence was defined by a
piecewise function.

<figure id="CNX_Precalculus_Figure_11_01_005">

</figure>
:::

:::: {#ti_11_01_03 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Write the first six terms of the sequence.

$$a_{n} = \begin{cases}
{2n^{3}} & {\text{if~}n\mspace{9mu}\text{is~odd}} \\
\frac{5n}{2} & {\text{if~}n\mspace{9mu}\text{is~even}}
\end{cases}$$

The first six terms are { 2,5,54,10,250,15 }.
::::

## Finding an Explicit Formula {#fs-id1165135195302}

Thus far, we have been given the explicit formula and asked to find a
number of terms of the sequence. Sometimes, the explicit formula for the
nth term of a sequence is not given. Instead, we are given several terms
from the sequence. When this happens, we can work in reverse to find an
explicit formula from the first few terms of a sequence. The key to
finding an explicit formula is to look for a pattern in the terms. Keep
in mind that the pattern may involve alternating terms, formulas for
numerators, formulas for denominators, exponents, or bases.

:::: {#fs-id1165137400858 .note}
::: title
:::

How To

*Given the first few terms of a sequence, find an explicit formula for
the sequence.*

Look for a pattern among the terms.

If the terms are fractions, look for a separate pattern among the
numerators and denominators.

Look for a pattern among the signs of the terms.

Write a formula for

a

n

in terms of

n

.

Test your formula for

n

=

1

,

n

=

2

,

and

n

=

3\.
::::

::: {#Example_11_01_04 .example}
Write an explicit formula for the nth term of each sequence.

‚ìê

{

‚àí

2

11

,

3

13

,

‚àí

4

15

,

5

17

,

‚àí

6

19

,

...

}

‚ìë

{

‚àí

2

25

,

‚àí

2

125

,

‚àí

2

625

,

‚àí

2

3

,

125

,

‚àí

2

15

,

625

,

...

}

‚ìí

{

e

4

,

e

5

,

e

6

,

e

7

,

e

8

,

...

}

Look for the pattern in each sequence.

‚ìê

The terms alternate between positive and negative. We can use

(

‚àí

1

)

n

to make the terms alternate. The numerator can be represented by

n

\+

1\.

The denominator can be represented by

2

n

\+

9\.

a n = (‚àí1) n (n+1) 2n+9

‚ìë

The terms are all negative.

So we know that the fraction is negative, the numerator is 2, and the
denominator can be represented by 5 n+1 .

$$a_{n} = - \frac{2}{5^{n + 1}}$$

‚ìí

The terms are powers of e. For n=1, the first term is e 4 so the
exponent must be n+3.

$$a_{n} = e^{n + 3}$$
:::

:::: {#fs-id1165137769962 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Write an explicit formula for the nth term of the sequence.

$$\text{\{9,}\mspace{9mu} - \text{81,}\mspace{9mu}\text{729,}\mspace{9mu} - \text{6,561,}\mspace{9mu}\text{59,049,}\mspace{9mu}\text{‚Ä¶\}}$$

a n = (‚àí1) n+1 9 n
::::

:::: {#eip-451 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Write an explicit formula for the nth term of the sequence.

$$\left\{ {- \frac{3}{4}, - \frac{9}{8}, - \frac{27}{12}, - \frac{81}{16}, - \frac{243}{20},...} \right\}$$

a n =‚àí 3 n 4n
::::

:::: {#eip-31 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Write an explicit formula for the nth term of the sequence.

$$\left\{ {\frac{1}{e^{2}},~\frac{1}{e},~1,~e,~e^{2},...} \right\}$$

a n = e n‚àí3
::::

# Writing the Terms of a Sequence Defined by a Recursive Formula {#fs-id1165137408239}

Sequences occur naturally in the growth patterns of nautilus shells,
pinecones, tree branches, and many other natural structures. We may see
the sequence in the leaf or branch arrangement, the number of petals of
a flower, or the pattern of the chambers in a nautilus shell. Their
growth follows the Fibonacci sequence, a famous sequence in which each
term can be found by adding the preceding two terms. The numbers in the
sequence are 1, 1, 2, 3, 5, 8, 13, 21, 34,.... Other examples from the
natural world that exhibit the Fibonacci sequence are the Calla Lily,
which has just one petal, the Black-Eyed Susan with 13 petals, and
different varieties of daisies that may have 21 or 34 petals.

Each term of the Fibonacci sequence depends on the terms that come
before it. The Fibonacci sequence cannot easily be written using an
explicit formula. Instead, we describe the sequence using a *recursive
formula*, a formula that defines the terms of a sequence using previous
terms.

A recursive formula always has two parts: the value of an initial term
(or terms), and an equation defining a n in terms of preceding terms.
For example, suppose we know the following:

$$\begin{array}{l}
{a_{1} = 3} \\
{a_{n} = 2a_{n - 1} - 1~\text{for}~n \geq 2}
\end{array}$$

We can find the subsequent terms of the sequence using the first term.

$$\begin{array}{l}
{a_{1} = 3} \\
{a_{2} = 2a_{1} - 1 = 2(3) - 1 = 5} \\
{a_{3} = 2a_{2} - 1 = 2(5) - 1 = 9} \\
{a_{4} = 2a_{3} - 1 = 2(9) - 1 = 17}
\end{array}$$

So the first four terms of the sequence are { 3,5,9,17 } .

The recursive formula for the Fibonacci sequence states the first two
terms and defines each successive term as the sum of the preceding two
terms.

$$\begin{array}{l}
{a_{1} = 1} \\
{a_{2} = 1} \\
{a_{n} = a_{n - 1} + a_{n - 2}~\text{for}~~n \geq 3}
\end{array}$$

To find the tenth term of the sequence, for example, we would need to
add the eighth and ninth terms. We were told previously that the eighth
and ninth terms are 21 and 34, so

$$a_{10} = a_{9} + a_{8} = 34 + 21 = 55$$

:::: {#fs-id1165134079762 .note}
::: title
Recursive Formula
:::

A recursive formula is a formula that defines each term of a sequence
using preceding term(s). Recursive formulas must always state the
initial term, or terms, of the sequence.
::::

:::: {#fs-id1165137831948 .note}
::: title
:::

Q&A

*Must the first two terms always be given in a recursive formula?*

*No. The Fibonacci sequence defines each term using the two preceding
terms, but many recursive formulas define each term using only one
preceding term. These sequences need only the first term to be defined.*
::::

:::: {#fs-id1165137408007 .note}
::: title
:::

How To

*Given a recursive formula with only the first term provided, write the
first n terms of a sequence.*

Identify the initial term,

a

1

,

which is given as part of the formula. This is the first term.

To find the second term,

a

2

,

substitute the initial term into the formula for

a

n

‚àí

1

.

Solve.

To find the third term,

a

3

,

substitute the second term into the formula. Solve.

Repeat until you have solved for the

n

th

term.
::::

::: {#Example_11_01_05 .example}
Write the first five terms of the sequence defined by the recursive
formula.

$$\begin{array}{l}
\begin{array}{l}
 \\
{a_{1} = 9}
\end{array} \\
{a_{n} = 3a_{n - 1} - 20\text{,~for~}n \geq 2}
\end{array}$$

The first term is given in the formula. For each subsequent term, we
replace a n‚àí1 with the value of the preceding term.

$$\begin{array}{ll}
{n = 1\begin{array}{lllll}
 & & & & 
\end{array}} & {a_{1} = 9} \\
{n = 2} & {a_{2} = 3a_{1} - 20 = 3(9) - 20 = 27 - 20 = 7} \\
{n = 3} & {a_{3} = 3a_{2} - 20 = 3(7) - 20 = 21 - 20 = 1} \\
{n = 4} & {a_{4} = 3a_{3} - 20 = 3(1) - 20 = 3 - 20 = - 17} \\
{n = 5} & {a_{5} = 3a_{4} - 20 = 3( - 17) - 20 = - 51 - 20 = - 71}
\end{array}$$

The first five terms are { 9,7,1,--17,--71 }. See [\#](#).

<figure id="Figure_11_01_006">

</figure>
:::

:::: {#fs-id1165135152248 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Write the first five terms of the sequence defined by the recursive
formula.

$$\begin{array}{l}
{a_{1} = 2} \\
{a_{n} = 2a_{n - 1} + 1\text{,~for~}n \geq 2}
\end{array}$$

{ 2,¬Ý5,¬Ý11,¬Ý23,¬Ý47 }
::::

:::: {#fs-id1165135209976 .note}
::: title
:::

How To

*Given a recursive formula with two initial terms, write the first n
terms of a sequence.*

Identify the initial term,

a

1

,

which is given as part of the formula.

Identify the second term,

a

2

,

which is given as part of the formula.

To find the third term, substitute the initial term and the second term
into the formula. Evaluate.

Repeat until you have evaluated the

n

th

term.
::::

::: {#Example_11_01_06 .example}
Write the first six terms of the sequence defined by the recursive
formula.

$$\begin{array}{l}
{a_{1} = 1} \\
{a_{2} = 2} \\
{a_{n} = 3a_{n - 1} + 4a_{n - 2}\text{,~for~}n \geq 3}
\end{array}$$

The first two terms are given. For each subsequent term, we replace a
n‚àí1 and a n‚àí2 with the values of the two preceding terms.

$$\begin{array}{lllllll}
{n = 3} & & & & & & {a_{3} = 3a_{2} + 4a_{1} = 3(2) + 4(1) = 10} \\
{n = 4} & & & & & & {a_{4} = 3a_{3} + 4a_{2} = 3(10) + 4(2) = 38} \\
{n = 5} & & & & & & {a_{5} = 3a_{4} + 4a_{3} = 3(38) + 4(10) = 154} \\
{n = 6} & & & & & & {a_{6} = 3a_{5} + 4a_{4} = 3(154) + 4(38) = 614}
\end{array}$$

The first six terms are {1,2,10,38,154,614}. See [\#](#).

<figure id="CNX_Precalculus_Figure_11_01_007">

</figure>
:::

:::: {#fs-id1165135435694 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Write the first 8 terms of the sequence defined by the recursive
formula.

$$\begin{array}{l}
\begin{array}{l}
 \\
{a_{1} = 0}
\end{array} \\
{a_{2} = 1} \\
{a_{3} = 1} \\
{a_{n} = \frac{a_{n - 1}}{a_{n - 2}} + a_{n - 3}\text{,~for~}n \geq 4}
\end{array}$$

{ 0,¬Ý1,¬Ý1,¬Ý1,¬Ý2,¬Ý3,¬Ý 5 2 , 17 6 }.
::::

# Using Factorial Notation {#fs-id1165137593595}

The formulas for some sequences include products of consecutive positive
integers. *n factorial*, written as n!, is the product of the positive
integers from 1 to n. For example,

$$\begin{array}{l}
{4! = 4 \cdot 3 \cdot 2 \cdot 1 = 24} \\
{5! = 5 \cdot 4 \cdot 3 \cdot 2 \cdot 1 = 120}
\end{array}$$

An example of formula containing a factorial is a n =(n+1)!. The sixth
term of the sequence can be found by substituting 6 for n.

$$a_{6} = (6 + 1)! = 7! = 7 \cdot 6 \cdot 5 \cdot 4 \cdot 3 \cdot 2 \cdot 1 = 5040$$

The factorial of any whole number n is n(n‚àí1)! We can therefore also
think of 5! as 5‚ãÖ4!.

:::: {#fs-id1165137738003 .note}
::: title
n Factorial
:::

*n* factorial is a mathematical operation that can be defined using a
recursive formula. The factorial of n, denoted n!, is defined for a
positive integer n as:

$$\begin{array}{l}
{0! = 1} \\
{1! = 1} \\
{n! = n\left( {n - 1} \right)\left( {n - 2} \right)\cdots(2)(1)\text{,~for~}n \geq 2}
\end{array}$$

The special case 0! is defined as 0!=1.
::::

:::: {#fs-id1165135404209 .note}
::: title
:::

Q&A

*Can factorials always be found using a calculator?*

*No. Factorials get large very quickly---faster than even exponential
functions! When the output gets too large for the calculator, it will
not be able to calculate the factorial.*
::::

::: {#Example_11_01_07 .example}
Write the first five terms of the sequence defined by the explicit
formula a n = 5n (n+2)! .

Substitute n=1,n=2, and so on in the formula.

$$\begin{array}{lllll}
{n = 1} & & & & {a_{1} = \frac{5(1)}{(1 + 2)!} = \frac{5}{3!} = \frac{5}{3 \cdot 2 \cdot 1} = \frac{5}{6}} \\
{n = 2} & & & & {a_{2} = \frac{5(2)}{(2 + 2)!} = \frac{10}{4!} = \frac{10}{4 \cdot 3 \cdot 2 \cdot 1} = \frac{5}{12}} \\
{n = 3} & & & & {a_{3} = \frac{5(3)}{(3 + 2)!} = \frac{15}{5!} = \frac{15}{5 \cdot 4 \cdot 3 \cdot 2 \cdot 1} = \frac{1}{8}} \\
{n = 4} & & & & {a_{4} = \frac{5(4)}{(4 + 2)!} = \frac{20}{6!} = \frac{20}{6 \cdot 5 \cdot 4 \cdot 3 \cdot 2 \cdot 1} = \frac{1}{36}} \\
{n = 5} & & & & {a_{5} = \frac{5(5)}{(5 + 2)!} = \frac{25}{7!} = \frac{25}{7 \cdot 6 \cdot 5 \cdot 4 \cdot 3 \cdot 2 \cdot 1} = \frac{5}{1\text{,}008}}
\end{array}$$

The first five terms are { 5 6 , 5 12 , 1 8 , 1 36 , 5 1,008 }.

[\#](#) shows the graph of the sequence. Notice that, since factorials
grow very quickly, the presence of the factorial term in the denominator
results in the denominator becoming much larger than the numerator as n
increases. This means the quotient gets smaller and, as the plot of the
terms shows, the terms are decreasing and nearing zero.

<figure id="CNX_Precalculus_Figure_11_01_008">

</figure>
:::

:::: {#fs-id1165137843972 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Write the first five terms of the sequence defined by the explicit
formula a n = (n+1)! 2n .

The first five terms are { 1,¬Ý 3 2 ,¬Ý4,15,72 }.
::::

:::: {#fs-id1165135510775 .note}
::: title
:::

Media

Access this online resource for additional instruction and practice with
sequences.

Finding Terms in a Sequence
::::

# Key Equations {#fs-id1165137851793}

  ------------------------- --------------------------------------------------
  Formula for a factorial   0!=1 1!=1 n!=n( n‚àí1 )( n‚àí2 )‚ãØ( 2 )( 1 ),¬Ýfor¬Ýn‚â•2
  ------------------------- --------------------------------------------------

# Key Concepts {#fs-id1165137563362}

A sequence is a list of numbers, called terms, written in a specific
order.

Explicit formulas define each term of a sequence using the position of
the term. See

,

, and

.

An explicit formula for the

n

th

term of a sequence can be written by analyzing the pattern of several
terms. See

.

Recursive formulas define each term of a sequence using previous terms.

Recursive formulas must state the initial term, or terms, of a sequence.

A set of terms can be written by using a recursive formula. See

and

.

A factorial is a mathematical operation that can be defined recursively.

The factorial of

n

is the product of all integers from 1 to

n

See

.

# Section Exercises {#fs-id1165137737878}

## Verbal {#fs-id1165137737882}

Discuss the meaning of a sequence. If a finite sequence is defined by a
formula, what is its domain? What about an infinite sequence?

A sequence is an ordered list of numbers that can be either finite or
infinite in number. When a finite sequence is defined by a formula, its
domain is a subset of the non-negative integers. When an infinite
sequence is defined by a formula, its domain is all positive or all
non-negative integers.

Describe three ways that a sequence can be defined.

Is the ordered set of even numbers an infinite sequence? What about the
ordered set of odd numbers? Explain why or why not.

Yes, both sets go on indefinitely, so they are both infinite sequences.

What happens to the terms a n of a sequence when there is a negative
factor in the formula that is raised to a power that includes n? What is
the term used to describe this phenomenon?

What is a factorial, and how is it denoted? Use an example to illustrate
how factorial notation can be beneficial.

A factorial is the product of a positive integer and all the positive
integers below it. An exclamation point is used to indicate the
operation. Answers may vary. An example of the benefit of using
factorial notation is when indicating the product It is much easier to
write than it is to write out 13‚ãÖ12‚ãÖ11‚ãÖ10‚ãÖ9‚ãÖ8‚ãÖ7‚ãÖ6‚ãÖ5‚ãÖ4‚ãÖ3‚ãÖ2‚ãÖ1.

## Algebraic {#fs-id1165137849152}

For the following exercises, write the first four terms of the sequence.

a n = 2 n ‚àí2

a n =‚àí 16 n+1

First four terms: ‚àí8,‚àí 16 3 ,‚àí4,‚àí 16 5

a n =‚àí ( ‚àí5 ) n‚àí1

a n = 2 n n 3

First four terms: 2, 1 2 , 8 27 , 1 4 .

a n = 2n+1 n 3

a n =1.25‚ãÖ ( ‚àí4 ) n‚àí1

First four terms: 1.25,‚àí5,20,‚àí80 .

a n =‚àí4‚ãÖ ( ‚àí6 ) n‚àí1

a n = n 2 2n+1

First four terms: 1 3 , 4 5 , 9 7 , 16 9 .

a n = ( ‚àí10 ) n +1

a n =‚àí( 4‚ãÖ (‚àí5) n‚àí1 5 )

First four terms: ‚àí 4 5 ,4,‚àí20,100

For the following exercises, write the first eight terms of the
piecewise sequence.

a n ={ (‚àí2) n ‚àí2 if¬Ýnis¬Ýeven (3) n‚àí1 if¬Ýnis¬Ýodd

a n ={ n 2 2n+1 if¬Ýn‚â§5 n 2 ‚àí5 if¬Ýn\>5

1 3 , 4 5 , 9 7 , 16 9 , 25 11 ,31,44,59

a n ={ (2n+1) 2 if¬Ýnis¬Ýdivisible¬Ýby¬Ý4 2 n if¬Ýnis¬Ýnot¬Ýdivisible¬Ýby¬Ý4

a n ={ ‚àí0.6‚ãÖ 5 n‚àí1 if¬Ýnis¬Ýprime¬Ýor¬Ý1 2.5‚ãÖ (‚àí2) n‚àí1 if¬Ýnis¬Ýcomposite

‚àí0.6,‚àí3,‚àí15,‚àí20,‚àí375,‚àí80,‚àí9375,‚àí320

a n ={ 4( n 2 ‚àí2) if¬Ýn‚â§3or¬Ýn\>¬Ý6 n 2 ‚àí2 4 if¬Ý3\<n‚â§6

For the following exercises, write an explicit formula for each
sequence.

4,¬Ý7,¬Ý12,¬Ý19,¬Ý28,...

a n = n 2 +3

‚àí4,2,‚àí10,14,‚àí34,...

1,1, 4 3 ,2, 16 5 ,...

a n = 2 n 2n or¬Ý 2 n‚àí1 n

0, 1‚àí e 1 1+ e 2 , 1‚àí e 2 1+ e 3 , 1‚àí e 3 1+ e 4 , 1‚àí e 4 1+ e 5 ,...

1,‚àí 1 2 , 1 4 ,‚àí 1 8 , 1 16 ,...

a n = ( ‚àí 1 2 ) n‚àí1

For the following exercises, write the first five terms of the sequence.

a 1 =9, a n = a n‚àí1 +n

a 1 =3, a n =( ‚àí3 ) a n‚àí1

First five terms: 3,‚àí9,27,‚àí81,243

a 1 =‚àí4, a n = a n‚àí1 +2n a n‚àí1 ‚àí1

a 1 =‚àí1, a n = ( ‚àí3 ) n‚àí1 a n‚àí1 ‚àí2

First five terms: ‚àí1,1,‚àí9, 27 11 , 891 5

a 1 =‚àí30, a n =( 2+ a n‚àí1 ) ( 1 2 ) n

For the following exercises, write the first eight terms of the
sequence.

a 1 = 1 24 , a 2 =1, a n =( 2 a n‚àí2 )( 3 a n‚àí1 )

1 24 ,1,¬Ý 1 4 , 3 2 , 9 4 , 81 4 , 2187 8 , 531,441 16

a 1 =‚àí1, a 2 =5, a n = a n‚àí2 ( 3‚àí a n‚àí1 )

a 1 =2, a 2 =10, a n = 2( a n‚àí1 +2 ) a n‚àí2

2,10,12, 14 5 , 4 5 ,2,10,12

For the following exercises, write a recursive formula for each
sequence.

‚àí2.5,‚àí5,‚àí10,‚àí20,‚àí40,...

‚àí8,‚àí6,‚àí3,1,6,...

a 1 =‚àí8, a n = a n‚àí1 +n

2,4,12,48,240,...

35,38,41,44,47,...

a 1 =35, a n = a n‚àí1 +3

15,3, 3 5 , 3 25 , 3 125 ,‚ãØ

For the following exercises, evaluate the factorial.

6!

720

( 12 6 )!

12! 6!

665,280

100! 99!

For the following exercises, write the first four terms of the sequence.

a n = n! n 2

First four terms: 1, 1 2 , 2 3 , 3 2

a n = 3‚ãÖn! 4‚ãÖn!

a n = n! n 2 ‚àín‚àí1

First four terms: ‚àí1,2, 6 5 , 24 11

a n = 100‚ãÖn n(n‚àí1)!

## Graphical {#fs-id1165137526798}

For the following exercises, graph the first five terms of the indicated
sequence

a n = ( ‚àí1 ) n n +n

a n ={ 4+n 2n if¬Ýnis¬Ýeven 3+n if¬Ýnis¬Ýodd

a 1 =2, a n = ( ‚àí a n‚àí1 +1 ) 2

a 1 =1, a n = a n‚àí1 +8

a n = ( n+1 )! ( n‚àí1 )!

For the following exercises, write an explicit formula for the sequence
using the first five points shown on the graph.

a n = 2 n‚àí2

For the following exercises, write a recursive formula for the sequence
using the first five points shown on the graph.

a 1 =6, a n =2 a n‚àí1 ‚àí5

## Technology {#fs-id1165137734881}

Follow these steps to evaluate a sequence defined recursively using a
graphing calculator:

On the home screen, key in the value for the initial term a 1 and press
*\[ENTER\]*. Enter the recursive formula by keying in all numerical
values given in the formula, along with the key strokes *\[2ND\] ANS*
for the previous term a n‚àí1 . Press *\[ENTER\]*. Continue pressing
*\[ENTER\]* to calculate the values for each successive term.

For the following exercises, use the steps above to find the indicated
term or terms for the sequence.

Find the first five terms of the sequence a 1 = 87 111 , a n = 4 3 a
n‚àí1 + 12 37 . Use the \>*Frac* feature to give fractional results.

First five terms: 29 37 , 152 111 , 716 333 , 3188 999 , 13724 2997

Find the 15th term of the sequence a 1 =625, a n =0.8 a n‚àí1 +18.

Find the first five terms of the sequence a 1 =2, a n = 2 \[( a n
‚àí1)‚àí1\] +1.

First five terms: 2, 3, 5, 17, 65537

Find the first ten terms of the sequence a 1 =8, a n = ( a n‚àí1 +1 )! a
n‚àí1 ! .

Find the tenth term of the sequence a 1 =2, a n =n a n‚àí1

a 10 =7,257,600

Follow these steps to evaluate a finite sequence defined by an explicit
formula. Using a TI-84, do the following.

In the home screen, press *\[2ND\] LIST*. Scroll over to *OPS* and
choose *"seq("* from the dropdown list. Press *\[ENTER\]*. In the line
headed *"Expr:"* type in the explicit formula, using the \[X,T,Œ∏,n\]
button for n In the line headed *"Variable:"* type in the variable used
on the previous step. In the line headed *"start:"* key in the value of
n that begins the sequence. In the line headed *"end:"* key in the value
of n that ends the sequence. Press *\[ENTER\]* 3 times to return to the
home screen. You will see the sequence syntax on the screen. Press
*\[ENTER\]* to see the list of terms for the finite sequence defined.
Use the right arrow key to scroll through the list of terms.

Using a TI-83, do the following.

In the home screen, press *\[2ND\] LIST*. Scroll over to *OPS* and
choose *"seq("* from the dropdown list. Press *\[ENTER\]*. Enter the
items in the order *"Expr"*, *"Variable"*, *"start"*, *"end"* separated
by commas. See the instructions above for the description of each item.
Press *\[ENTER\]* to see the list of terms for the finite sequence
defined. Use the right arrow key to scroll through the list of terms.

For the following exercises, use the steps above to find the indicated
terms for the sequence. Round to the nearest thousandth when necessary.

List the first five terms of the sequence a n =‚àí 28 9 n+ 5 3 .

List the first six terms of the sequence a n = n 3 ‚àí3.5 n 2 +¬Ý4.1n‚àí1.5
2.4n .

First six terms: 0.042, 0.146, 0.875, 2.385, 4.708

List the first five terms of the sequence a n = 15n‚ãÖ ( ‚àí2 ) n‚àí1 47

List the first four terms of the sequence a n = 5.7 n +0.275( n‚àí1 )!

First four terms: 5.975, 2.765, 185.743, 1057.25, 6023.521

List the first six terms of the sequence a n = n! n .

## Extensions {#fs-id1165137696684}

Consider the sequence defined by a n =‚àí6‚àí8n. Is a n =‚àí421 a term in the
sequence? Verify the result.

If a n =‚àí421 is a term in the sequence, then solving the equation
‚àí421=‚àí6‚àí8n for n will yield a non-negative integer. However, if
‚àí421=‚àí6‚àí8n, then n=51.875 so a n =‚àí421 is not a term in the sequence.

What term in the sequence a n = n 2 +4n+4 2( n+2 ) has the value 41?
Verify the result.

Find a recursive formula for the sequence 1, 0, ‚àí1, ‚àí1, 0, 1, 1, 0, ‚àí1,
‚àí1, 0, 1, 1, \.... (*Hint*: find a pattern for a n based on the first
two terms.)

a 1 =1, a 2 =0, a n = a n‚àí1 ‚àí a n‚àí2

Calculate the first eight terms of the sequences a n = ( n+2 )! ( n‚àí1 )!
and b n = n 3 +3 n 2 +2n, and then make a conjecture about the
relationship between these two sequences.

Prove the conjecture made in the preceding exercise.

(n+2)! (n‚àí1)! = (n+2)¬∑(n+1)¬∑(n)¬∑(n‚àí1)¬∑\...¬∑3¬∑2¬∑1 (n‚àí1)¬∑\...¬∑3¬∑2¬∑1
=n(n+1)(n+2)= n 3 +3 n 2 +2n

# 

explicit formula

a formula that defines each term of a sequence in terms of its position
in the sequence

finite sequence

a function whose domain consists of a finite subset of the positive
integers

{

1

,

2

,

...

n

}

for some positive integer

n

infinite sequence

a function whose domain is the set of positive integers

n factorial

the product of all the positive integers from 1 to

n

nth term of a sequence

a formula for the general term of a sequence

recursive formula

a formula that defines each term of a sequence using previous term(s)

sequence

a function whose domain is a subset of the positive integers

term

a number in a sequence
