m49445

> In this section, you will:
>
> Find the common difference for an arithmetic sequence.
>
> Write terms of an arithmetic sequence.
>
> Use a recursive formula for an arithmetic sequence.
>
> Use an explicit formula for an arithmetic sequence.

35388d0f-fefc-42fc-857a-1c0c8e20d85f

#  {#eip-756}

## Learning Objectives {#eip-823}

Determine if a sequence is arithmetic (IA 12.2.1)

Find the general term (nth term) of an arithmetic sequence (IA 12.2.2)

## Objective 1: Determine if a sequence is arithmetic (IA 12.2.1) {#eip-52}

An arithmetic sequence is a sequence where the difference between
consecutive terms is always the same.

The difference between consecutive terms, *d*, and is called the common
difference, for n greater than or equal to two.

$$d = a_{n} - a_{n - 1}$$

::: {#eip-939 .example}
Determine if each sequence is arithmetic. If so, indicate the common
difference.

ⓐ 5,9,13,17,21,25,...

ⓑ 4,9,12,17,20,25,...

To determine if the sequence is arithmetic, we find the difference of
the consecutive terms shown.

ⓐ Find the difference ofthe consecutive terms.5,9,13,1721,25,...
9−513−917−1321−1725−21 44444 The sequence is arithmetic. The common
difference isd=4.

ⓑ Find the difference ofthe consecutive terms.4,9,12,1720,25,...
9−412−917−1220−1725−20 23535 The sequence is not arithmetic as all the
differences betweenthe consecutive terms are not the same.There is no
common difference.
:::

### Practice Makes Perfect {#eip-640}

Determine if each sequence is arithmetic. If so, indicate the common
difference.

-4, 4, 2, 10, 8, 16, ...

  ------------------------------------------- --
                                              
  Find the difference of consecutive terms.   
                                              
  ------------------------------------------- --

-3, -1, 1, 3, 5, 7, ...

  ------------------------------------------- --
                                              
  Find the difference of consecutive terms.   
                                              
  ------------------------------------------- --

::: {#eip-971 .example}
Write the first five terms of the sequence where the first term is 5 and
the common difference is d=−6.

We start with the first term and add the common difference. Then we add
the common difference to that result to get the next term, and so on.

$$\begin{matrix}
a_{1} & & & a_{2} & & & a_{3} & & & a_{4} & & & a_{5} & & \\
5 & & & {5 + (-6)} & & & {-1 + (-6)} & & & {-7 + (-6)} & & & {-13 + (-6)} & & \\
 & & & \operatorname{-1} & & & \operatorname{-7} & & & \operatorname{-13} & & & \operatorname{-19} & & 
\end{matrix}$$

The sequence is 5,−1,−7,−13,−19,...
:::

### Practice Makes Perfect {#eip-549}

Write the first five terms of the sequence where the first term is --4
and the common difference is d=7.

$$\begin{matrix}
a_{1} & & & a_{2} & & & a_{3} & & & a_{4} & & & a_{5} & & \\
-4 & & & & & & & & & & & & & & 
\end{matrix}$$

The sequence is:
\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

## Objective 2: Find the general term (nth term) of an arithmetic sequence (IA 12.2.2) {#eip-894}

In the last section, we found a formula for the general term of a
sequence, we can also find a formula for the general term of an
arithmetic sequence.

Let's write the first few terms of a sequence where the first term is a1
and the common difference is *d*. We will then look for a pattern.

As we look for a pattern we see that each term starts with a1 .

The first term adds 0*d* to the a1 , the second term adds 1*d*, the
third term adds 2*d*, the fourth term adds 3*d*, and the fifth term adds
4*d*. The number of *d*s that were added to a1 is one less than the
number of the term. We then have the formula for the general term of an
arithmetic sequence.

:::: {#eip-772 .note}
::: title
General term (nth term) of an arithmetic sequence
:::

The general term of an arithmetic sequence with first term

a

1

and the common difference

d

is

a

n

=

a

1

\+

(

n

\-

1

)

d
::::

::: {#eip-994 .example}
Find the general term (nth term) of an arithmetic sequence.

ⓐ

Find the twenty-first term of a sequence where the first term is three
and the common difference is eight.

ⓑ

Find the eleventh term of a sequence where the third term is 19 and the
common difference is five. Give the formula for the general term.

  ------------------------------------------------------------------- -------------------------------
  ⓐ To find the 21st term, use the formula with a1=3, d=8, and n=21   an=a1+(n-1)d
  Substitute                                                          a21=3+(21-1)(8)
  Simplify                                                            a21=3+(20)(8)a21=3+160a21=163
  ------------------------------------------------------------------- -------------------------------

  -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ----------------------------------------------------
  ⓑ Let\'s first find a1. Use the formula with a3=19, d=5, and n=3. Substitute these values and simplify   an=a1+(n-1)da3=a1+(3-1)(5)19=a1+(2)(5)19=a1+10a1=9
  To find the 11th term, use the formula with a3=9, d=5, and n=11 Substitute these values and simplify     an=a1+(n-1)da11=9+(11-1)(5)a11=9+(10)(5)a11=59
  To find the general term, substitute a=9 and d=5 into the formula.                                       an=a1+(n-1)da11=9+(11-1)(5)a11=9+(10)(5)a11=59
  -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ----------------------------------------------------
:::

### Practice Makes Perfect {#eip-493}

Find the general term (nth term) of an arithmetic sequence.

Find the sixteenth term of a sequence where the first term is 11 and the
common difference is −6.

  -- ---------------
     an=a1+(n--1)d
     
     
  -- ---------------

Find the 19th term of a sequence where the 5th term is 1 and the common
difference is -4. Give the formula for the general term.

  -- --
     
     
     
  -- --

Companies often make large purchases, such as computers and vehicles,
for business use. The book-value of these supplies decreases each year
for tax purposes. This decrease in value is called depreciation. One
method of calculating depreciation is straight-line depreciation, in
which the value of the asset decreases by the same amount each year.

As an example, consider a woman who starts a small contracting business.
She purchases a new truck for \$25,000. After five years, she estimates
that she will be able to sell the truck for \$8,000. The loss in value
of the truck will therefore be \$17,000, which is \$3,400 per year for
five years. The truck will be worth \$21,600 after the first year;
\$18,200 after two years; \$14,800 after three years; \$11,400 after
four years; and \$8,000 at the end of five years. In this section, we
will consider specific kinds of sequences that will allow us to
calculate depreciation, such as the truck's value.

# Finding Common Differences {#fs-id1165137417740}

The values of the truck in the example are said to form an *arithmetic
sequence* because they change by a constant amount each year. Each term
increases or decreases by the same constant value called the *common
difference* of the sequence. For this sequence, the common difference is
--3,400.

The sequence below is another example of an arithmetic sequence. In this
case, the constant difference is 3. You can choose any term of the
sequence, and add 3 to find the subsequent term.

:::: {#fs-id1165137855317 .note}
::: title
Arithmetic Sequence
:::

An arithmetic sequence is a sequence that has the property that the
difference between any two consecutive terms is a constant. This
constant is called the common difference. If a 1 is the first term of an
arithmetic sequence and d is the common difference, the sequence will
be:

$$\left\{ a_{n} \right\} = \left\{ a_{1},a_{1} + d,a_{1} + 2d,a_{1} + 3d,... \right\}$$
::::

::: {#Example_11_02_01 .example}
Is each sequence arithmetic? If so, find the common difference.

ⓐ

{

1

,

2

,

4

,

8

,

16

,

\...

}

ⓑ

{

−

3

,

1

,

5

,

9

,

13

,

\...

}

Subtract each term from the subsequent term to determine whether a
common difference exists.

ⓐ

The sequence is not arithmetic because there is no common difference.

ⓑ

The sequence is arithmetic because there is a common difference. The
common difference is 4.

The graph of each of these sequences is shown in [\#](#). We can see
from the graphs that, although both sequences show growth, a is not
linear whereas b is linear. Arithmetic sequences have a constant rate of
change so their graphs will always be points on a line.

<figure id="CNX_Precalculus_Figure_11_02_003">

</figure>
:::

:::: {#fs-id1165137722470 .note}
::: title
:::

Q&A

*If we are told that a sequence is arithmetic, do we have to subtract
every term from the following term to find the common difference?*

*No. If we know that the sequence is arithmetic, we can choose any one
term in the sequence, and subtract it from the subsequent term to find
the common difference.*
::::

:::: {#fs-id1165135169188 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Is the given sequence arithmetic? If so, find the common difference.

$$\left\{ 18,\mspace{9mu} 16,\mspace{9mu} 14,\mspace{9mu} 12,\mspace{9mu} 10,\ldots \right\}$$

The sequence is arithmetic. The common difference is --2.
::::

:::: {#eip-130 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Is the given sequence arithmetic? If so, find the common difference.

$$\left\{ 1,\mspace{9mu} 3,\mspace{9mu} 6,\mspace{9mu} 10,\mspace{9mu} 15,\ldots \right\}$$

The sequence is not arithmetic because 3−1≠6−3.
::::

# Writing Terms of Arithmetic Sequences {#fs-id1165137635400}

Now that we can recognize an arithmetic sequence, we will find the terms
if we are given the first term and the common difference. The terms can
be found by beginning with the first term and adding the common
difference repeatedly. In addition, any term can also be found by
plugging in the values of n and d into formula below.

$$a_{n} = a_{1} + (n - 1)d$$

:::: {#fs-id1165135481158 .note}
::: title
:::

*Given the first term and the common difference of an arithmetic
sequence, find the first several terms.*

Add the common difference to the first term to find the second term.

Add the common difference to the second term to find the third term.

Continue until all of the desired terms are identified.

Write the terms separated by commas within brackets.
::::

::: {#Example_11_02_02 .example}
Write the first five terms of the arithmetic sequence with a 1 =17 and
d=−3 .

Adding −3 is the same as subtracting 3. Beginning with the first term,
subtract 3 from each term to find the next term.

The first five terms are {17,14,11,8,5}

As expected, the graph of the sequence consists of points on a line as
shown in [\#](#).

<figure id="CNX_Precalculus_Figure_11_02_004">

</figure>
:::

:::: {#ti_11_02_03 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

List the first five terms of the arithmetic sequence with a 1 =1 and d=5
.

{ 1 ,   6 ,   11 ,   16 ,   21 }
::::

:::: {#fs-id1165135362484 .note}
::: title
:::

*Given any first term and any other term in an arithmetic sequence, find
a given term.*

Substitute the values given for

a

1

,

a

n

,

n

into the formula

a

n

=

a

1

\+

(

n

−

1

)

d

to solve for

d

.

Find a given term by substituting the appropriate values for

a

1

,

n

,

and

d

into the formula

a

n

=

a

1

\+

(

n

−

1

)

d

.
::::

::: {#Example_11_02_03 .example}
Given a 1 =8 and a 4 =14 , find a 5 .

The sequence can be written in terms of the initial term 8 and the
common difference d .

$$\left\{ {8,8 + d,8 + 2d,8 + 3d} \right\}$$

We know the fourth term equals 14; we know the fourth term has the form
a 1 +3d=8+3d .

We can find the common difference d .

$$\begin{array}{ll}
{a_{n} = a_{1} + (n - 1)d} & \\
{a_{4} = a_{1} + 3d} & \\
{a_{4} = 8 + 3d} & {\text{Write~the~fourth~term~of~the~sequence~in~terms~of}~a_{1}~\text{and}~d.} \\
{14 = 8 + 3d} & {\text{Substitute}~14~\text{for}~a_{4}.} \\
{~\mspace{9mu}\mspace{9mu} d = 2} & {\text{Solve~for~the~common~difference}.}
\end{array}$$

Find the fifth term by adding the common difference to the fourth term.

$$a_{5} = a_{4} + 2 = 16$$

Notice that the common difference is added to the first term once to
find the second term, twice to find the third term, three times to find
the fourth term, and so on. The tenth term could be found by adding the
common difference to the first term nine times or by using the equation
a n = a 1 +( n−1 )d.
:::

:::: {#fs-id1165137552415 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Given a 3 =7 and a 5 =17 , find a 2 .

a 2 = 2
::::

# Using Recursive Formulas for Arithmetic Sequences {#fs-id1165137445093}

Some arithmetic sequences are defined in terms of the previous term
using a recursive formula. The formula provides an algebraic rule for
determining the terms of the sequence. A recursive formula allows us to
find any term of an arithmetic sequence using a function of the
preceding term. Each term is the sum of the previous term and the common
difference. For example, if the common difference is 5, then each term
is the previous term plus 5. As with any recursive formula, the first
term must be given.

$$\begin{array}{lllll}
{a_{n} = a_{n - 1} + d} & & & & {n \geq 2}
\end{array}$$

:::: {#fs-id1165135341395 .note}
::: title
Recursive Formula for an Arithmetic Sequence
:::

The recursive formula for an arithmetic sequence with common difference
d is:

$$\begin{array}{lllll}
{a_{n} = a_{n - 1} + d} & & & & {n \geq 2}
\end{array}$$
::::

:::: {#fs-id1165137592768 .note}
::: title
:::

*Given an arithmetic sequence, write its recursive formula.*

Subtract any term from the subsequent term to find the common
difference.

State the initial term and substitute the common difference into the
recursive formula for arithmetic sequences.
::::

::: {#Example_11_02_04 .example}
Write a recursive formula for the arithmetic sequence.

$$\left\{ - 18\text{,~} - 7\text{,~}4\text{,~}15\text{,~}26\text{,~…} \right\}$$

The first term is given as −18 . The common difference can be found by
subtracting the first term from the second term.

$$d = -7 - (-18) = 11$$

Substitute the initial term and the common difference into the recursive
formula for arithmetic sequences.

$$\begin{array}{l}
{a_{1} = - 18} \\
{a_{n} = a_{n - 1} + 11,\mspace{9mu}\text{for~}n \geq 2}
\end{array}$$

We see that the common difference is the slope of the line formed when
we graph the terms of the sequence, as shown in [\#](#). The growth
pattern of the sequence shows the constant difference of 11 units.

<figure id="CNX_Precalculus_Figure_11_02_005">

</figure>
:::

:::: {#fs-id1165137664621 .note}
::: title
:::

Q&A

*Do we have to subtract the first term from the second term to find the
common difference?*

*No. We can subtract any term in the sequence from the subsequent term.
It is, however, most common to subtract the first term from the second
term because it is often the easiest method of finding the common
difference.*
::::

:::: {#fs-id1165137472888 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Write a recursive formula for the arithmetic sequence.

$$\left\{ 25\text{,~}~37\text{,~}~49\text{,~}~61\text{,~}~\text{…} \right\}$$

a 1 = 25 a n = a n − 1 + 12 , for  n ≥ 2
::::

# Using Explicit Formulas for Arithmetic Sequences {#fs-id1165137733870}

We can think of an arithmetic sequence as a function on the domain of
the natural numbers; it is a linear function because it has a constant
rate of change. The common difference is the constant rate of change, or
the slope of the function. We can construct the linear function if we
know the slope and the vertical intercept.

$$a_{n} = a_{1} + d(n - 1)$$

To find the *y*-intercept of the function, we can subtract the common
difference from the first term of the sequence. Consider the following
sequence.

The common difference is −50 , so the sequence represents a linear
function with a slope of −50 . To find the y -intercept, we subtract −50
from 200:200−(−50)=200+50=250 . You can also find the y -intercept by
graphing the function and determining where a line that connects the
points would intersect the vertical axis. The graph is shown in [\#](#).

<figure id="CNX_Precalculus_Figure_11_02_007">

</figure>

Recall the slope-intercept form of a line is y=mx+b. When dealing with
sequences, we use a n in place of y and n in place of x. If we know the
slope and vertical intercept of the function, we can substitute them for
m and b in the slope-intercept form of a line. Substituting −50 for the
slope and 250 for the vertical intercept, we get the following equation:

$$a_{n} = - 50n + 250$$

We do not need to find the vertical intercept to write an explicit
formula for an arithmetic sequence. Another explicit formula for this
sequence is a n =200−50(n−1) , which simplifies to a n =−50n+250.

:::: {#fs-id1165137855306 .note}
::: title
Explicit Formula for an Arithmetic Sequence
:::

An explicit formula for the nth term of an arithmetic sequence is given
by

$$a_{n} = a_{1} + d(n - 1)$$
::::

:::: {#fs-id1165137619575 .note}
::: title
:::

*Given the first several terms for an arithmetic sequence, write an
explicit formula.*

Find the common difference,

a

2

−

a

1

.

Substitute the common difference and the first term into

a

n

=

a

1

\+

d

(

n

−

1

)

.
::::

::: {#Example_11_02_05 .example}
Write an explicit formula for the arithmetic sequence.

$$\left\{ 2\text{,~}12\text{,~}22\text{,~}32\text{,~}42\text{,~…} \right\}$$

The common difference can be found by subtracting the first term from
the second term.

$$\begin{array}{ll}
d & {= a_{2} - a_{1}} \\
 & {= 12 - 2} \\
 & {= 10}
\end{array}$$

The common difference is 10. Substitute the common difference and the
first term of the sequence into the formula and simplify.

$$\begin{array}{l}
{a_{n} = 2 + 10(n - 1)} \\
{a_{n} = 10n - 8}
\end{array}$$

The graph of this sequence, represented in [\#](#), shows a slope of 10
and a vertical intercept of −8 .

<figure id="CNX_Precalculus_Figure_11_02_008">

</figure>
:::

:::: {#fs-id1165137742434 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Write an explicit formula for the following arithmetic sequence.

$$\left\{ 50,47,44,41,\ldots \right\}$$

a n = 53 − 3 n
::::

## Finding the Number of Terms in a Finite Arithmetic Sequence {#fs-id1165137454430}

Explicit formulas can be used to determine the number of terms in a
finite arithmetic sequence. We need to find the common difference, and
then determine how many times the common difference must be added to the
first term to obtain the final term of the sequence.

:::: {#fs-id1165137475678 .note}
::: title
:::

How To

*Given the first three terms and the last term of a finite arithmetic
sequence, find the total number of terms.*

Find the common difference

d

.

Substitute the common difference and the first term into

a

n

=

a

1

\+

d

(

n

--

1

)

.

Substitute the last term for

a

n

and solve for

n

.
::::

::: {#Example_11_02_06 .example}
Find the number of terms in the finite arithmetic sequence.

$$\left\{ 8\text{,~}1\text{,~}–6\text{,~}...\text{,~}–41 \right\}$$

The common difference can be found by subtracting the first term from
the second term.

$$1 - 8 = - 7$$

The common difference is −7 . Substitute the common difference and the
initial term of the sequence into the nth term formula and simplify.

$$\begin{array}{l}
{a_{n} = a_{1} + d(n - 1)} \\
{a_{n} = 8 + ( - 7)(n - 1)} \\
{a_{n} = 15 - 7n}
\end{array}$$

Substitute −41 for a n and solve for n

$$\begin{array}{l}
{- 41 = 15 - 7n} \\
{\mspace{9mu}\mspace{9mu}\mspace{9mu}\mspace{9mu}\mspace{9mu}\mspace{9mu}\mspace{9mu}\mspace{9mu} 8 = n}
\end{array}$$

There are eight terms in the sequence.
:::

:::: {#fs-id1165137734532 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Find the number of terms in the finite arithmetic sequence.

$$\left\{ 6\text{,~}11\text{,~}16\text{,~}...\text{,~}56 \right\}$$

There are 11 terms in the sequence.
::::

## Solving Application Problems with Arithmetic Sequences {#fs-id1165137569473}

In many application problems, it often makes sense to use an initial
term of a 0 instead of a 1 . In these problems, we alter the explicit
formula slightly to account for the difference in initial terms. We use
the following formula:

$$a_{n} = a_{0} + dn$$

::: {#Example_11_02_07 .example}
A five-year old child receives an allowance of \$1 each week. His
parents promise him an annual increase of \$2 per week.

ⓐ

Write a formula for the child's weekly allowance in a given year.

ⓑ

What will the child's allowance be when he is 16 years old?

ⓐ

The situation can be modeled by an arithmetic sequence with an initial
term of 1 and a common difference of 2.

Let A be the amount of the allowance and n be the number of years after
age 5. Using the altered explicit formula for an arithmetic sequence we
get:

$$A_{n} = 1 + 2n$$

ⓑ

We can find the number of years since age 5 by subtracting.

$$16 - 5 = 11$$

We are looking for the child's allowance after 11 years. Substitute 11
into the formula to find the child's allowance at age 16.

$$A_{11} = 1 + 2(11) = 23$$

The child's allowance at age 16 will be \$23 per week.
:::

:::: {#fs-id1165137423288 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

A woman decides to go for a 10-minute run every day this week and plans
to increase the time of her daily run by 4 minutes each week. Write a
formula for the time of her run after n weeks. How long will her daily
run be 8 weeks from today?

The formula is T n =10+4n, and it will take her 42 minutes.
::::

:::: {#fs-id1165137731449 .note}
::: title
:::

Media

Access this online resource for additional instruction and practice with
arithmetic sequences.

Arithmetic Sequences
::::

# Key Equations {#fs-id1165137442033}

  ---------------------------------------------------------- ----------------------
  recursive formula for nth term of an arithmetic sequence   a n = a n−1 +d , n≥2
  explicit formula for nth term of an arithmetic sequence    a n = a 1 +d(n−1)
  ---------------------------------------------------------- ----------------------

# Key Concepts {#fs-id1165134037666}

An arithmetic sequence is a sequence where the difference between any
two consecutive terms is a constant.

The constant between two consecutive terms is called the common
difference.

The common difference is the number added to any one term of an
arithmetic sequence that generates the subsequent term. See

.

The terms of an arithmetic sequence can be found by beginning with the
initial term and adding the common difference repeatedly. See

and

.

A recursive formula for an arithmetic sequence with common difference

d

is given by

a

n

=

a

n

−

1

\+

d

,

n

≥

2\.

See

.

As with any recursive formula, the initial term of the sequence must be
given.

An explicit formula for an arithmetic sequence with common difference

d

is given by

a

n

=

a

1

\+

d

(

n

−

1

)

.

See

.

An explicit formula can be used to find the number of terms in a
sequence. See

.

In application problems, we sometimes alter the explicit formula
slightly to

a

n

=

a

0

\+

d

n

.

See

.

# Section Exercises {#fs-id1165137862597}

## Verbal {#fs-id1165137806994}

What is an arithmetic sequence?

A sequence where each successive term of the sequence increases (or
decreases) by a constant value.

How is the common difference of an arithmetic sequence found?

How do we determine whether a sequence is arithmetic?

We find whether the difference between all consecutive terms is the
same. This is the same as saying that the sequence has a common
difference.

What are the main differences between using a recursive formula and
using an explicit formula to describe an arithmetic sequence?

Describe how linear functions and arithmetic sequences are similar. How
are they different?

Both arithmetic sequences and linear functions have a constant rate of
change. They are different because their domains are not the same;
linear functions are defined for all real numbers, and arithmetic
sequences are defined for natural numbers or a subset of the natural
numbers.

## Algebraic {#fs-id1165135245639}

For the following exercises, find the common difference for the
arithmetic sequence provided.

{ 5 , 11 , 17 , 23 , 29 , \... }

{ 0 , 1 2 , 1 , 3 2 , 2 , \... }

The common difference is 1 2

For the following exercises, determine whether the sequence is
arithmetic. If so find the common difference.

{ 11.4 , 9.3 , 7.2 , 5.1 , 3 , \... }

{ 4 , 16 , 64 , 256 , 1024 , \... }

The sequence is not arithmetic because 16−4≠64−16.

For the following exercises, write the first five terms of the
arithmetic sequence given the first term and common difference.

a 1 =−25 , d=−9

a 1 =0 , d= 2 3

0, 2 3 , 4 3 ,2, 8 3

For the following exercises, write the first five terms of the
arithmetic series given two terms.

a 1 =17, a 7 =−31

a 13 =−60, a 33 =−160

0 , − 5 , − 10 , − 15 , − 20

For the following exercises, find the specified term for the arithmetic
sequence given the first term and common difference.

First term is 3, common difference is 4, find the 5th term.

First term is 4, common difference is 5, find the 4th term.

a 4 =19

First term is 5, common difference is 6, find the 8th term.

First term is 6, common difference is 7, find the 6th term.

a 6 =41

First term is 7, common difference is 8, find the 7th term.

For the following exercises, find the first term given two terms from an
arithmetic sequence.

Find the first term or a 1 of an arithmetic sequence if a 6 =12 and a 14
=28.

a 1 =2

Find the first term or a 1 of an arithmetic sequence if a 7 =21 and a 15
=42.

Find the first term or a 1 of an arithmetic sequence if a 8 =40 and a 23
=115.

a 1 =5

Find the first term or a 1 of an arithmetic sequence if a 9 =54 and a 17
=102.

Find the first term or a 1 of an arithmetic sequence if a 11 =11 and a
21 =16.

a 1 =6

For the following exercises, find the specified term given two terms
from an arithmetic sequence.

a 1 =33 and a 7 =−15. Find a 4 .

a 3 =−17.1 and a 10 =−15.7. Find a 21 .

a 21 =−13.5

For the following exercises, use the recursive formula to write the
first five terms of the arithmetic sequence.

a 1 =39; a n = a n−1 −3

a 1 =−19; a n = a n−1 −1.4

−19,−20.4,−21.8,−23.2,−24.6

For the following exercises, write a recursive formula for each
arithmetic sequence.

a ={ 40,60,80,\... }

a ={17,26,35,\...}

a 1 =17;  a n = a n−1 +9 n≥2

a ={−1,2,5,\...}

a ={12,17,22,\...}

a 1 =12;  a n = a n−1 +5 n≥2

a ={−15,−7,1,\...}

a ={8.9,10.3,11.7,\...}

a 1 =8.9;  a n = a n−1 +1.4 n≥2

a ={−0.52,−1.02,−1.52,\...}

a ={ 1 5 , 9 20 , 7 10 ,\... }

a 1 = 1 5 ;  a n = a n−1 + 1 4 n≥2

a ={ − 1 2 ,− 5 4 ,−2,\... }

a ={ 1 6 ,− 11 12 ,−2,\... }

1 = 1 6 ;  a n = a n−1 − 13 12 n≥2

For the following exercises, write a recursive formula for the given
arithmetic sequence, and then find the specified term.

a ={7, 4, 1, \...}; Find the 17th term.

a ={4, 11, 18, \...}; Find the 14th term.

a 1 =4; a n = a n−1 +7; a 14 =95

a ={2, 6, 10, \...}; Find the 12th term.

For the following exercises, use the explicit formula to write the first
five terms of the arithmetic sequence.

a n =24−4n

First five terms: 20,16,12,8,4.

a n = 1 2 n− 1 2

For the following exercises, write an explicit formula for each
arithmetic sequence.

a ={3,5,7,\...}

a n =1+2n

a ={32,24,16,\...}

a ={−5, 95, 195, \...}

a n =−105+100n

a ={−17, −217, −417,\...}

a ={1.8, 3.6, 5.4, \...}

a n =1.8n

a ={−18.1,−16.2,−14.3,\...}

a ={15.8,18.5,21.2,\...}

a n =13.1+2.7n

a ={ 1 3 ,− 4 3 ,−3, \... }

a ={ 0, 1 3 , 2 3 ,\... }

a n = 1 3 n− 1 3

a ={ −5,− 10 3 ,− 5 3 ,... }

For the following exercises, find the number of terms in the given
finite arithmetic sequence.

a ={3,−4,−11, \...,−60}

There are 10 terms in the sequence.

a ={1.2,1.4,1.6,\...,3.8}

a ={ 1 2 ,2, 7 2 ,\...,8 }

There are 6 terms in the sequence.

## Graphical {#fs-id1165137659723}

For the following exercises, determine whether the graph shown
represents an arithmetic sequence.

The graph does not represent an arithmetic sequence.

For the following exercises, use the information provided to graph the
first 5 terms of the arithmetic sequence.

a 1 =0,d=4

a 1 =9; a n = a n−1 −10

a n =−12+5n

## Technology {#fs-id1165137723291}

For the following exercises, follow the steps to work with the
arithmetic sequence a n =3n−2 using a graphing calculator:

Press *\[MODE\]* Select SEQ in the fourth line Select DOT in the fifth
line Press *\[ENTER\]* Press *\[Y=\]* nMin is the first counting number
for the sequence. Set nMin=1 u(n) is the pattern for the sequence. Set
u(n)=3n−2 u(nMin) is the first number in the sequence. Set u(nMin)=1
Press *\[2ND\]* then *\[WINDOW\]* to go to *TBLSET* Set TblStart=1 Set
ΔTbl=1 Set Indpnt: Auto and Depend: Auto Press *\[2ND\]* then
*\[GRAPH\]* to go to the *TABLE*

What are the first seven terms shown in the column with the heading
u(n)?

1,4,7,10,13,16,19

Use the scroll-down arrow to scroll to n=50. What value is given for
u(n)?

Press *\[WINDOW\]*. Set nMin=1, nMax=5, xMin=0, xMax=6, yMin=−1, and
yMax=14. Then press *\[GRAPH\]*. Graph the sequence as it appears on the
graphing calculator.

For the following exercises, follow the steps given above to work with
the arithmetic sequence a n = 1 2 n+5 using a graphing calculator.

What are the first seven terms shown in the column with the heading u(n)
in the TABLE feature?

Graph the sequence as it appears on the graphing calculator. Be sure to
adjust the WINDOW settings as needed.

## Extensions {#fs-id1165137697185}

Give two examples of arithmetic sequences whose 4th terms are 9.

Give two examples of arithmetic sequences whose 10th terms are 206.

Answers will vary. Examples: a n =20.6n and a n =2+20.4n.

Find the 5th term of the arithmetic sequence {9b,5b,b,...}.

Find the 11th term of the arithmetic sequence {3a−2b,a+2b,−a+6b...}.

a 11 =−17a+38b

At which term does the sequence {5.4,14.5,23.6,\...} exceed 151?

At which term does the sequence { 17 3 , 31 6 , 14 3 ,\... } begin to
have negative values?

The sequence begins to have negative values at the 13th term, a 13 =− 1
3

For which terms does the finite arithmetic sequence { 5 2 , 19 8 , 9 4
,\..., 1 8 } have integer values?

Write an arithmetic sequence using a recursive formula. Show the first 4
terms, and then find the 31st term.

Answers will vary. Check to see that the sequence is arithmetic.
Example: Recursive formula: a 1 =3, a n = a n−1 −3. First 4 terms:
3,0,−3,−6 a 31 =−87

Write an arithmetic sequence using an explicit formula. Show the first 4
terms, and then find the 28th term.

# 

arithmetic sequence

a sequence in which the difference between any two consecutive terms is
a constant

common difference

the difference between any two consecutive terms in an arithmetic
sequence
