m49446

> In this section, you will:
>
> Find the common ratio for a geometric sequence.
>
> List the terms of a geometric sequence.
>
> Use a recursive formula for a geometric sequence.
>
> Use an explicit formula for a geometric sequence.

94ee3a01-1ca8-4d05-8e23-a5baba74e1a6

#  {#eip-462}

## Learning Objectives {#eip-272}

Determine if a sequence is geometric (IA 12.3.1).

Find the general term (nth term) of a geometric sequence (IA 12.3.2).

## Objective 1: Determine if a sequence is geometric (IA 12.3.1) {#eip-762}

A sequence is called a geometric sequence if the ratio between
consecutive terms is always the same.

The ratio between consecutive terms in a geometric sequence is *r*, the
common ratio, where *n* is greater than or equal to two.

$$r = \frac{a_{n}}{a_{n - 1}}$$

::: {#eip-133 .example}
Determine if each sequence is geometric. If so, indicate the common
ratio.

ⓐ 4,8,16,32,64,128,...

ⓑ −2,6,−12,36,−72,216,...

To determine if the sequence is geometric, we find the ratio of the
consecutive terms shown.

ⓐ Find the ratio ofthe consecutive terms.4,8,16,32,64,128,...
841683216643212864 22222 The sequence is geometric. The common ratio
isr=2.

ⓑ Find the ratio ofthe consecutive terms.−2,6,−12,36,−72,216,...
6−2−12636−12−7236216−72 −3−2−3−2−3 The sequence is not geometric. There
is no common ratio.
:::

### Practice Makes Perfect {#eip-235}

Determine if each sequence is geometric. If so, indicate the common
ratio.

−150, −30, −15, −5, --52, ...

  -------------------------------------- --
  Find the ratio of consecutive terms.   
                                         
  -------------------------------------- --

8, 4, 2, 1, 12, 14, ...

  -------------------------------------- --
  Find the ratio of consecutive terms.   
                                         
  -------------------------------------- --

::: {#eip-343 .example}
Write the first five terms of the sequence where the first term is 3 and
the common ratio is r=−2.

We start with the first term and multiply it by the common ratio. Then
we multiply that result by the common ratio to get the next term, and so
on.

$$\begin{matrix}
a_{1} & & & a_{2} & & & a_{3} & & & a_{4} & & & a_{5} \\
3 & & & {3 \cdot (-2)} & & & {\operatorname{}-6 \cdot (-2)} & & & {\operatorname{}12 \cdot (-2)} & & & {\operatorname{}-24 \cdot (-2)} \\
 & & & -6 & & & 12 & & & -24 & & & 48
\end{matrix}$$

The sequence is 3,−6,12,−24,48,...
:::

### Practice Makes Perfect {#eip-150}

Write the first five terms of the sequence where the first term is 7 and
the common ratio is r=-3 .

+------------------+------------------+------------------+------------------+------------------+
| a1               | a2               | a3               | a4               | a5               |
+------------------+------------------+------------------+------------------+------------------+
| 7                |                  |                  |                  |                  |
+------------------+------------------+------------------+------------------+------------------+
| The sequence is:                                                                             |
| \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_             |
+----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+

## Objective 2: Find the general term (nth term) of a geometric sequence (IA 12.3.2) {#eip-233}

Let's find the formula for the general term of a geometric sequence.

Let's write the first few terms of the sequence where the first term is
a1 and the common ratio is r . We will then look for a pattern.

:::: {#eip-214 .note}
::: title
General term (nth term) of a geometric sequence
:::

The general term of a geometric sequence with first term

a

1

and the common ratio

r

is

a

n

=

a

1

r

n

\-

1
::::

::: {#eip-156 .example}
ⓐ

Find the thirteenth term of a sequence where the first term is 81 and
the common ratio is r=1/3.

ⓑ

Find the ninth term of the sequence 6, 18, 54, 162, 486, 1458, ... Then
find the general term for the sequence.

ⓐ

Find the thirteenth term of a sequence where the first term is 81 and
the common ratio is r=1/3.

  ------------------------------------------------------------------- ------------------------------------
  To find the 13th term, use the formula with a1=81, r=1/3 and n=13   an=a1rn-1
  Substitute                                                          a13=81(13)13-1
  Simplify                                                            a13=81(13)13-1a13=81(13)12a13=1729
  ------------------------------------------------------------------- ------------------------------------

ⓑ

Find the ninth term of the sequence 6, 18, 54, 162, 486, 1458, ... Then
find the general term for the sequence.

  --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ----------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Let's first determine a1 and the common ratio r                                                     The first term is 6, so  a1=6The ratio is: 186=5418=16254=482162=1458486=3
  To find the 9th term, use the formula with a1=6, r=3 and n=9.Substitute these values and simplify   an=a1rn-1a9=6(3)9-1a9=6(3)8a9=39366
  To find the general term, substitute a1=6 and r=3 into the formula                                  an=a1rn-1an=6(3)n-1
  --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ----------------------------------------------------------------------------
:::

### Practice Makes Perfect {#eip-257}

Find the general term (nth term) of a geometric sequence.

Find the sixteenth term of a sequence where the first term is 11 and the
common ratio is −6.

Find the 10th term of the sequence 9, 18, 36, 72, 144, 288, .... Then
give the formula for the general term.

:::: {#eip-179 .note}
::: title
:::

Find the general term (nth term) of a geometric sequence.

A patient takes a 30 mg antibiotic capsule. At the end of any hour, the
amount of antibiotic remaining in her body is only 90% of the amount in
the beginning of that hour. The table below shows the amount of medicine
remaining in the body at the beginning of each hour.

  ---------- -------------------------------
  Time *t*   Dose remaining after time *t*
  1          30mg
  2          27mg
  3          24.3mg
  4          21.87mg
  5          19.68mg
  ---------- -------------------------------

ⓐ

Find the ratio of consecutive terms. Is this a geometric sequence?

ⓑ

Find a formula for the general term of this sequence.

ⓒ

How much of the medicine is left at the beginning of hour 7? Hour 12?
Hour 24?
::::

Many jobs offer an annual cost-of-living increase to keep salaries
consistent with inflation. Suppose, for example, a recent college
graduate finds a position as a sales manager earning an annual salary of
\$26,000. He is promised a 2% cost of living increase each year. His
annual salary in any given year can be found by multiplying his salary
from the previous year by 102%. His salary will be \$26,520 after one
year; \$27,050.40 after two years; \$27,591.41 after three years; and so
on. When a salary increases by a constant rate each year, the salary
grows by a constant factor. In this section, we will review sequences
that grow in this way.

# Finding Common Ratios {#fs-id1165137715137}

The yearly salary values described form a *geometric sequence* because
they change by a constant factor each year. Each term of a geometric
sequence increases or decreases by a constant factor called the *common
ratio*. The sequence below is an example of a geometric sequence because
each term increases by a constant factor of 6. Multiplying any term of
the sequence by the common ratio 6 generates the subsequent term.

:::: {#fs-id1165137749987 .note}
::: title
Definition of a Geometric Sequence
:::

A geometric sequence is one in which any term divided by the previous
term is a constant. This constant is called the common ratio of the
sequence. The common ratio can be found by dividing any term in the
sequence by the previous term. If a 1 is the initial term of a geometric
sequence and r is the common ratio, the sequence will be

$$\left\{ a_{1},~\mspace{9mu} a_{1}r,\mspace{9mu} a_{1}r^{2},\mspace{9mu} a_{1}r^{3},\mspace{9mu}... \right\}.$$
::::

:::: {#fs-id1165137417317 .note}
::: title
:::

How To

*Given a set of numbers, determine if they represent a geometric
sequence.*

Divide each term by the previous term.

Compare the quotients. If they are the same, a common ratio exists and
the sequence is geometric.
::::

::: {#Example_11_03_01 .example}
Is the sequence geometric? If so, find the common ratio.

ⓐ

1

,

2

,

4

,

8

,

16

,

\...

ⓑ

48

,

12

,

4

, 

2

,

\...

Divide each term by the previous term to determine whether a common
ratio exists.

ⓐ

2

1

=

2

4

2

=

2

8

4

=

2

16

8

=

2

The sequence is geometric because there is a common ratio. The common
ratio is 2.

ⓑ

12

48

=

1

4

4

12

=

1

3

2

4

=

1

2

The sequence is not geometric because there is not a common ratio.

The graph of each sequence is shown in [\#](#). It seems from the graphs
that both (a) and (b) appear have the form of the graph of an
exponential function in this viewing window. However, we know that (a)
is geometric and so this interpretation holds, but (b) is not.

<figure id="CNX_Precalc_Figure_11_03_002">

</figure>
:::

:::: {#fs-id1165137742586 .note}
::: title
:::

Q&A

*If you are told that a sequence is geometric, do you have to divide
every term by the previous term to find the common ratio?*

*No. If you know that the sequence is geometric, you can choose any one
term in the sequence and divide it by the previous term to find the
common ratio.*
::::

:::: {#fs-id1165135241213 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Is the sequence geometric? If so, find the common ratio.

$$5,10,15,20,...$$

The sequence is not geometric because 10 5 ≠ 15 10 .
::::

:::: {#eip-234 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Is the sequence geometric? If so, find the common ratio.

$$100,20,4,\frac{4}{5},...$$

The sequence is geometric. The common ratio is 1 5 .
::::

# Writing Terms of Geometric Sequences {#fs-id1165137433726}

Now that we can identify a geometric sequence, we will learn how to find
the terms of a geometric sequence if we are given the first term and the
common ratio. The terms of a geometric sequence can be found by
beginning with the first term and multiplying by the common ratio
repeatedly. For instance, if the first term of a geometric sequence is a
1 =−2 and the common ratio is r=4, we can find subsequent terms by
multiplying −2⋅4 to get −8 then multiplying the result −8⋅4 to get −32
and so on.

$$\begin{array}{l}
{a_{1} = - 2} \\
{a_{2} = ( - 2 \cdot 4) = - 8} \\
{a_{3} = ( - 8 \cdot 4) = - 32} \\
{a_{4} = ( - 32 \cdot 4) = - 128}
\end{array}$$

The first four terms are {--2, --8, --32, --128}.

:::: {#fs-id1165137939702 .note}
::: title
:::

How To

*Given the first term and the common factor, find the first four terms
of a geometric sequence.*

Multiply the initial term,

a

1

,

by the common ratio to find the next term,

a

2

.

Repeat the process, using

a

n

=

a

2

to find

a

3

and then

a

3

to find

a

4,

until all four terms have been identified.

Write the terms separated by commons within brackets.
::::

::: {#Example_11_03_02 .example}
List the first four terms of the geometric sequence with a 1 =5 and
r=--2.

Multiply a 1 by −2 to find a 2 . Repeat the process, using a 2 to find a
3 , and so on.

$$\begin{array}{l}
{a_{1} = 5} \\
{a_{2} = - 2a_{1} = - 10} \\
{a_{3} = - 2a_{2} = 20} \\
{a_{4} = - 2a_{3} = - 40}
\end{array}$$

The first four terms are { 5,--10,20,--40 }.
:::

:::: {#fs-id1165137416531 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

List the first five terms of the geometric sequence with a 1 =18 and r=
1 3 .

{ 18,6,2, 2 3 , 2 9 }
::::

# Using Recursive Formulas for Geometric Sequences {#fs-id1165135694573}

A recursive formula allows us to find any term of a geometric sequence
by using the previous term. Each term is the product of the common ratio
and the previous term. For example, suppose the common ratio is 9. Then
each term is nine times the previous term. As with any recursive
formula, the initial term must be given.

:::: {#fs-id1165137448332 .note}
::: title
Recursive Formula for a Geometric Sequence
:::

The recursive formula for a geometric sequence with common ratio r and
first term a 1 is

$$a_{n} = ra_{n - 1},n \geq 2$$
::::

:::: {#fs-id1165135207482 .note}
::: title
:::

How To

*Given the first several terms of a geometric sequence, write its
recursive formula.*

State the initial term.

Find the common ratio by dividing any term by the preceding term.

Substitute the common ratio into the recursive formula for a geometric
sequence.
::::

::: {#Example_11_03_03 .example}
Write a recursive formula for the following geometric sequence.

$$\left\{ 6\text{,~}9\text{,~}13.5\text{,~}20.25\text{,~}... \right\}$$

The first term is given as 6. The common ratio can be found by dividing
the second term by the first term.

$$r = \frac{9}{6} = 1.5$$

Substitute the common ratio into the recursive formula for geometric
sequences and define a 1 .

$$\begin{array}{l}
{a_{n} = ra_{n - 1}} \\
{a_{n} = 1.5a_{n - 1}\mspace{9mu}\text{for~}n \geq 2} \\
{a_{1} = 6}
\end{array}$$

The sequence of data points follows an exponential pattern. The common
ratio is also the base of an exponential function as shown in [\#](#)

<figure id="CNX_Precalc_Figure_11_03_003">

</figure>
:::

:::: {#fs-id1165137804164 .note}
::: title
:::

*Do we have to divide the second term by the first term to find the
common ratio?*

*No. We can divide any term in the sequence by the previous term. It is,
however, most common to divide the second term by the first term because
it is often the easiest method of finding the common ratio.*
::::

:::: {#fs-id1165137461314 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Write a recursive formula for the following geometric sequence.

$$\left\{ 2\text{,~}\frac{4}{3}\text{,~}\frac{8}{9}\text{,~}\frac{16}{27}\text{,~}... \right\}$$

a 1 =2 a n = 2 3 a n−1 for n≥2
::::

# Using Explicit Formulas for Geometric Sequences {#fs-id1165137656805}

Because a geometric sequence is an exponential function whose domain is
the set of positive integers, and the common ratio is the base of the
function, we can write explicit formulas that allow us to find
particular terms.

$$a_{n} = a_{1}r^{n - 1}$$

Let's take a look at the sequence {18, 36, 72, 144, 288, \...}. This is
a geometric sequence with a common ratio of 2 and an exponential
function with a base of 2. An explicit formula for this sequence is

$$a_{n} = 18 \cdot 2^{n - 1}$$

The graph of the sequence is shown in [\#](#).

<figure id="CNX_Precalc_Figure_11_03_004">

</figure>

:::: {#fs-id1165137647200 .note}
::: title
Explicit Formula for a Geometric Sequence
:::

The n th term of a geometric sequence is given by the explicit formula:

$$a_{n} = a_{1}r^{n - 1}$$
::::

::: {#Example_11_03_04 .example}
Given a geometric sequence with a 1 =3 and a 4 =24, find a 2 .

The sequence can be written in terms of the initial term and the common
ratio r.

$$3,3r,3r^{2},3r^{3},...$$

Find the common ratio using the given fourth term.

$$\begin{array}{ll}
{a_{n} = a_{1}r^{n - 1}} & \\
{a_{4} = 3r^{3}} & {\text{Write~the~fourth~term~of~sequence~in~terms~of~}\alpha_{1}\mspace{9mu}\text{and~}r} \\
{24 = 3r^{3}} & {\text{Substitute~}24\mspace{9mu}\text{for}\mspace{9mu} a_{4}} \\
{\mspace{9mu}\mspace{9mu}\mspace{9mu} 8 = r^{3}} & \text{Divide} \\
{\mspace{9mu}\mspace{9mu}\mspace{9mu} r = 2} & \text{Solve~for~the~common~ratio}
\end{array}$$

Find the second term by multiplying the first term by the common ratio.

$$\begin{array}{ll}
a_{2} & {= 2a_{1}} \\
 & {= 2(3)} \\
 & {= 6}
\end{array}$$

The common ratio is multiplied by the first term once to find the second
term, twice to find the third term, three times to find the fourth term,
and so on. The tenth term could be found by multiplying the first term
by the common ratio nine times or by multiplying by the common ratio
raised to the ninth power.
:::

:::: {#fs-id1165137444993 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Given a geometric sequence with a 2 =4 and a 3 =32 , find a 6 .

a 6 =16,384
::::

::: {#Example_11_03_05 .example}
Write an explicit formula for the nth term of the following geometric
sequence.

$$\left\{ 2\text{,~}10\text{,~}50\text{,~}250\text{,~}... \right\}$$

The first term is 2. The common ratio can be found by dividing the
second term by the first term.

$$\frac{10}{2} = 5$$

The common ratio is 5. Substitute the common ratio and the first term of
the sequence into the formula.

$$\begin{array}{l}
{a_{n} = a_{1}r^{(n - 1)}} \\
{a_{n} = 2 \cdot 5^{n - 1}}
\end{array}$$

The graph of this sequence in [\#](#) shows an exponential pattern.

<figure id="CNX_Precalc_Figure_11_03_005">

</figure>
:::

:::: {#fs-id1165137600603 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Write an explicit formula for the following geometric sequence.

$$\left\{ –1\text{,~}3\text{,~}–9\text{,~}27\text{,~}... \right\}$$

a n =− (−3) n−1
::::

# Solving Application Problems with Geometric Sequences {#fs-id1165135251448}

In real-world scenarios involving geometric sequences, we may need to
use an initial term of a 0 instead of a 1 . In these problems, we can
alter the explicit formula slightly by using the following formula:

$$a_{n} = a_{0}r^{n}$$

::: {#Example_11_03_06 .example}
In 2013, the number of students in a small school is 284. It is
estimated that the student population will increase by 4% each year.

ⓐ

Write a formula for the student population.

ⓑ

Estimate the student population in 2020.

ⓐ

The situation can be modeled by a geometric sequence with an initial
term of 284. The student population will be 104% of the prior year, so
the common ratio is 1.04.

Let P be the student population and n be the number of years after 2013.
Using the explicit formula for a geometric sequence we get

$$P_{n}~ = 284 \cdot 1.04^{n}$$

ⓑ

We can find the number of years since 2013 by subtracting.

$$2020 - 2013 = 7$$

We are looking for the population after 7 years. We can substitute 7 for
n to estimate the population in 2020.

$$P_{7} = 284 \cdot 1.04^{7} \approx 374$$

The student population will be about 374 in 2020.
:::

:::: {#fs-id1165137768542 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

A business starts a new website. Initially the number of hits is 293 due
to the curiosity factor. The business estimates the number of hits will
increase by 2.6% per week.

ⓐWrite a formula for the number of hits. ⓑEstimate the number of hits in
5 weeks.

ⓐ P n  = 293⋅1.026 a n ⓑThe number of hits will be about 333.
::::

:::: {#fs-id1165137443318 .note}
::: title
:::

Media

Access these online resources for additional instruction and practice
with geometric sequences.

Geometric Sequences

Determine the Type of Sequence

Find the Formula for a Sequence
::::

# Key Equations {#fs-id1165135264797}

  -------------------------------------------------------- --------------------
  recursive formula for nth term of a geometric sequence   a n =r a n−1 ,n≥ 2
  explicit formula for nth term of a geometric sequence    a n = a 1 r n−1
  -------------------------------------------------------- --------------------

# Key Concepts {#fs-id1165137611739}

A geometric sequence is a sequence in which the ratio between any two
consecutive terms is a constant.

The constant ratio between two consecutive terms is called the common
ratio.

The common ratio can be found by dividing any term in the sequence by
the previous term. See

.

The terms of a geometric sequence can be found by beginning with the
first term and multiplying by the common ratio repeatedly. See

and

.

A recursive formula for a geometric sequence with common ratio

r

is given by

a

n

=

r

a

n

--

1

for

n

≥

2

.

As with any recursive formula, the initial term of the sequence must be
given. See

.

An explicit formula for a geometric sequence with common ratio

r

is given by

a

n

=

a

1

r

n

--

1

.

See

.

In application problems, we sometimes alter the explicit formula
slightly to

a

n

=

a

0

r

n

.

See

.

# Section Exercises {#fs-id1165137695322}

## Verbal {#fs-id1165137603819}

What is a geometric sequence?

A sequence in which the ratio between any two consecutive terms is
constant.

How is the common ratio of a geometric sequence found?

What is the procedure for determining whether a sequence is geometric?

Divide each term in a sequence by the preceding term. If the resulting
quotients are equal, then the sequence is geometric.

What is the difference between an arithmetic sequence and a geometric
sequence?

Describe how exponential functions and geometric sequences are similar.
How are they different?

Both geometric sequences and exponential functions have a constant
ratio. However, their domains are not the same. Exponential functions
are defined for all real numbers, and geometric sequences are defined
only for positive integers. Another difference is that the base of a
geometric sequence (the common ratio) can be negative, but the base of
an exponential function must be positive.

## Algebraic {#fs-id1165135185333}

For the following exercises, find the common ratio for the geometric
sequence.

1,3,9,27,81,\...

−0.125,0.25,−0.5,1,−2,\...

The common ratio is −2

−2,− 1 2 ,− 1 8 ,− 1 32 ,− 1 128 ,\...

For the following exercises, determine whether the sequence is
geometric. If so, find the common ratio.

−6,−12,−24,−48,−96,\...

The sequence is geometric. The common ratio is 2.

5,5.2,5.4,5.6,5.8,\...

−1, 1 2 ,− 1 4 , 1 8 ,− 1 16 ,\...

The sequence is geometric. The common ratio is − 1 2 .

6,8,11,15,20,\...

0.8,4,20,100,500,\...

The sequence is geometric. The common ratio is 5.

For the following exercises, write the first five terms of the geometric
sequence, given the first term and common ratio.

a 1 =8, r=0.3

a 1 =5, r= 1 5

5,1, 1 5 , 1 25 , 1 125

For the following exercises, write the first five terms of the geometric
sequence, given any two terms.

a 7 =64, a 10 =512

a 6 =25, a 8 =6.25

800,400,200,100,50

For the following exercises, find the specified term for the geometric
sequence, given the first term and common ratio.

The first term is 2, and the common ratio is 3. Find the 5th term.

The first term is 16 and the common ratio is − 1 3 . Find the 4th term.

a 4 =− 16 27

For the following exercises, find the specified term for the geometric
sequence, given the first four terms.

a n ={ −1,2,−4,8,\... }. Find a 12 .

a n ={ −2, 2 3 ,− 2 9 , 2 27 ,\... }. Find a 7 .

a 7 =− 2 729

For the following exercises, write the first five terms of the geometric
sequence.

a 1 =−486, a n =− 1 3 a n−1

a 1 =7, a n =0.2 a n−1

7,1.4,0.28,0.056,0.0112

For the following exercises, write a recursive formula for each
geometric sequence.

a n ={ −1,5,−25,125,\... }

a n ={ −32,−16,−8,−4,\... }

a = 1 −32, a n = 1 2 a n−1

a n ={ 14,56,224,896,\... }

a n ={ 10,−3,0.9,−0.27,\... }

a 1 =10, a n =−0.3 a n−1

a n ={ 0.61,1.83,5.49,16.47,\... }

a n ={ 3 5 , 1 10 , 1 60 , 1 360 ,\... }

a 1 = 3 5 , a n = 1 6 a n−1

a n ={ −2, 4 3 ,− 8 9 , 16 27 ,\... }

a n ={ 1 512 ,− 1 128 , 1 32 ,− 1 8 ,\... }

a 1 = 1 512 , a n =−4 a n−1

For the following exercises, write the first five terms of the geometric
sequence.

a n =−4⋅ 5 n−1

a n =12⋅ ( − 1 2 ) n−1

12,−6,3,− 3 2 , 3 4

For the following exercises, write an explicit formula for each
geometric sequence.

a n ={ −2,−4,−8,−16,\... }

a n ={ 1,3,9,27,\... }

a n = 3 n−1

a n ={ −4,−12,−36,−108,\... }

a n ={ 0.8,−4,20,−100,\... }

a n =0.8⋅ (−5) n−1

a n ={−1.25,−5,−20,−80,\...}

a n ={ −1,− 4 5 ,− 16 25 ,− 64 125 ,\... }

a n =− ( 4 5 ) n−1

a n ={ 2, 1 3 , 1 18 , 1 108 ,\... }

a n ={ 3,−1, 1 3 ,− 1 9 ,\... }

a n =3⋅ ( − 1 3 ) n−1

For the following exercises, find the specified term for the geometric
sequence given.

Let a 1 =4, a n =−3 a n−1 . Find a 8 .

Let a n =− ( − 1 3 ) n−1 . Find a 12 .

a 12 = 1 177,147

For the following exercises, find the number of terms in the given
finite geometric sequence.

a n ={ −1,3,−9,\...,2187 }

a n ={ 2,1, 1 2 ,\..., 1 1024 }

There are 12 terms in the sequence.

## Graphical {#fs-id1165137638147}

For the following exercises, determine whether the graph shown
represents a geometric sequence.

The graph does not represent a geometric sequence.

For the following exercises, use the information provided to graph the
first five terms of the geometric sequence.

a 1 =1, r= 1 2

a 1 =3, a n =2 a n−1

a n =27⋅ 0.3 n−1

## Extensions {#fs-id1165137611626}

Use recursive formulas to give two examples of geometric sequences whose
3rd terms are 200.

Answers will vary. Examples: a 1 =800, a n =0.5a n−1 and a 1 =12.5, a n
=4a n−1

Use explicit formulas to give two examples of geometric sequences whose
7th terms are 1024.

Find the 5th term of the geometric sequence {b,4b,16b,\...}.

a 5 =256b

Find the 7th term of the geometric sequence
{64a(−b),32a(−3b),16a(−9b),\...}.

At which term does the sequence {10,12,14.4,17.28,\...} exceed 100?

The sequence exceeds 100 at the 14th term, a 14 ≈107.

At which term does the sequence { 1 2187 , 1 729 , 1 243 , 1 81 \... }
begin to have integer values?

For which term does the geometric sequence a n =−36 ( 2 3 ) n−1 first
have a non-integer value?

a 4 =− 32 3 is the first non-integer value

Use the recursive formula to write a geometric sequence whose common
ratio is an integer. Show the first four terms, and then find the 10th
term.

Use the explicit formula to write a geometric sequence whose common
ratio is a decimal number between 0 and 1. Show the first 4 terms, and
then find the 8th term.

Answers will vary. Example: Explicit formula with a decimal common
ratio: a n =400⋅ 0.5 n−1 ; First 4 terms: 400,200,100,50; a 8 =3.125

Is it possible for a sequence to be both arithmetic and geometric? If
so, give an example.

# 

common ratio

the ratio between any two consecutive terms in a geometric sequence

geometric sequence

a sequence in which the ratio of a term to a previous term is a constant
