m49447

> In this section, you will:
>
> Use summation notation.
>
> Use the formula for the sum of the ﬁrst n terms of an arithmetic
> series.
>
> Use the formula for the sum of the ﬁrst n terms of a geometric series.
>
> Use the formula for the sum of an inﬁnite geometric series.
>
> Solve annuity problems.

06d76408-a317-4dcb-9bcc-26ab2bb71ba6

#  {#eip-255}

## Learning Objectives {#eip-339}

Use summation notation to write a sum. (IA 12.1.5)

Find the sum of the first n terms of an arithmetic sequence. (IA 12.2.3)

## Objective 1: Use summation notation to write a sum. (IA 12.1.5) {#eip-322}

A series is the sum of the terms of a sequence. For example, 1 + 6 + 11+
16 + 21 + 26 + 31 is the sum of the first seven terms arithmetic
sequence with general term, an=5n-4.

We write a series by using the summation notation. In order to write
that summation, we will need to find the general term of our sequence
and the summation will look like:

For the series, 1 + 6 + 11 + 16 + 21 + 26 + 31 + \.... the summation
notation is ∑n=175n-4

::: {#eip-812 .example}
Use summation notation to write the sum.

Write the sum using summation notation: 1+12+13+14+15

  -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ------------------------
                                                                                         n:1,2,3,4,5
  Look for a pattern in the terms.                                                       Terms: 1,12,13,14,15
  The numerators are all one. The denominators are the counting numbers from 1 thru 5.   Pattern: 1,12,13,14,15
  The general terms is:                                                                  1n
  The sum in summation notation is:                                                      ∑n=151n
  -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ------------------------
:::

### Practice Makes Perfect {#eip-65}

Use summation notation to write the sum.

Write the sum using summation notation: 1+14+19+116+125+136

Write the sum using summation notation: 13+19+127+181+1243

## Objective 2: Find the sum of the first n terms of an arithmetic sequence. (IA 12.2.3) {#eip-187}

:::: {#eip-417 .note}
::: title
Sum of the First *n* Terms of an Arithmetic Sequence
:::

The sum, Sn, of the first *n* terms of an arithmetic sequence is

$$S_{n} = \frac{n}{2}(a_{1} + a_{n})$$

where a1 is the first term and an is the *n*th term.
::::

::: {#eip-902 .example}
Find the sum of the first n terms of an arithmetic sequence.

ⓐ Find the sum of the first 30 terms of the arithmetic sequence: 7, 10,
13, 13, 19,\... ⓑ Find the sum of the first 50 terms of the arithmetic
sequence whose general term is an=2n-5 . ⓒ Find the sum ∑i=130(6i-4)

ⓐ

To find the sum of the 30 first terms, we use the formula Sn=n2(a1+an).

We know that a1=7, d=3 , and n=30  but we need to find a30 .

  ------------------------------------------------------------- ----------------------------------
  To find the 30th term, use the formula a1=7, d=3 and n=30 .   an=a1+(n-1)d
  Substitute                                                    a30=7+(30-1)(3)
  Simplify                                                      a30=7+(29)(3)a30=7+87a30=94
  To find S30 use the formula with a1=7, a30=94 and n=30.       Sn=n2(a1+an)
  Substitute and simplify                                       S30=302(7+94)S30=15(101)S30=1515
  ------------------------------------------------------------- ----------------------------------

ⓑ

To the sum of the first 50 terms of the arithmetic sequence whose
general term is an=2n-5 . We need to find a1 and a50 and substitute in
the formula.

  -------------------------------------------------------------- --------------------------
  Find a1                                                        an=2n-5a1=2(1)-5a1=-3
  Find a50                                                       an=2n-5a50=2(50)-5a50=95
  Then find S50 , use the formula with a1=-3, a50=95 and n=50.   Sn=n2(a1+an)
  Substitute and simplify                                        S50=502(-3+95)S50=25(92)
                                                                 S50=2300
  -------------------------------------------------------------- --------------------------

ⓒ

∑i=130(6i-4) means find the sum of the first 30 terms of the sequence
whose general term is 6i-4 . We need to find a1 and a30 and substitute
in the formula.

  -------------------------------------------------------------- -----------------------------------
  Find a1                                                        ai=6i-4a1=6(1)-4a1=2
  Find a30                                                       ai=6i-4a30=6(30)-4a30=176
  Then find S30 , use the formula with a1=2, a30=176 and n=30.   Sn=n2(a1+an)
  Substitute and simplify                                        S30=302(2+176)S30=15(178)S30=2630
  -------------------------------------------------------------- -----------------------------------
:::

##  {#eip-374}

### Practice Makes Perfect {#eip-488}

Find the sum of the first 30 terms of the arithmetic sequence: 16, 10,
4, --2, --8, .........

Find the sum of the first 50 terms of the arithmetic sequence whose
general term is an=2n+7 .

Find the sum: ∑i=130(7i-5)

A parent decides to start a college fund for their daughter. They plan
to invest \$50 in the fund each month. The fund pays 6% annual interest,
compounded monthly. How much money will they have saved when their
daughter is ready to start college in 6 years? In this section, we will
learn how to answer this question. To do so, we need to consider the
amount of money invested and the amount of interest earned.

# Using Summation Notation {#fs-id1165137405637}

To find the total amount of money in the college fund and the sum of the
amounts deposited, we need to add the amounts deposited each month and
the amounts earned monthly. The sum of the terms of a sequence is called
a series. Consider, for example, the following series.

$$3 + 7 + 11 + 15 + 19 + ...$$

The *n*th partial sum of a series is the sum of a finite number of
consecutive terms beginning with the first term. The notation S n
represents the partial sum.

$$\begin{array}{l}
{S_{1} = 3} \\
{S_{2} = 3 + 7 = 10} \\
{S_{3} = 3 + 7 + 11 = 21} \\
{S_{4} = 3 + 7 + 11 + 15 = 36}
\end{array}$$

*Summation notation* is used to represent series. Summation notation is
often known as sigma notation because it uses the Greek capital letter
sigma, Σ, to represent the sum. Summation notation includes an explicit
formula and specifies the first and last terms in the series. An
explicit formula for each term of the series is given to the right of
the sigma. A variable called the *index of summation* is written below
the sigma. The index of summation is set equal to the *lower limit of
summation*, which is the number used to generate the first term in the
series. The number above the sigma, called the *upper limit of
summation*, is the number used to generate the last term in a series.

If we interpret the given notation, we see that it asks us to find the
sum of the terms in the series a k =2k for k=1 through k=5. We can begin
by substituting the terms for k and listing out the terms of this
series.

$$\begin{array}{l}
\begin{array}{l}
 \\
{a_{1} = 2(1) = 2}
\end{array} \\
{a_{2} = 2(2) = 4} \\
{a_{3} = 2(3) = 6} \\
{a_{4} = 2(4) = 8} \\
{a_{5} = 2(5) = 10}
\end{array}$$

We can find the sum of the series by adding the terms:

$${\sum\limits_{k = 1}^{5}{2k}} = 2 + 4 + 6 + 8 + 10 = 30$$

:::: {#fs-id1165137726612 .note}
::: title
Summation Notation
:::

The sum of the first n terms of a *series* can be expressed in summation
notation as follows:

$$\sum\limits_{k = 1}^{n}a_{k}$$

This notation tells us to find the sum of a k from k=1 to k=n.

k is called the index of summation, 1 is the lower limit of summation,
and n is the upper limit of summation.
::::

:::: {#fs-id1165137732268 .note}
::: title
:::

Q&A

*Does the lower limit of summation have to be 1?*

*No. The lower limit of summation can be any number, but 1 is frequently
used. We will look at examples with lower limits of summation other than
1.*
::::

:::: {#fs-id1165137828154 .note}
::: title
:::

How To

*Given summation notation for a series, evaluate the value.*

Identify the lower limit of summation.

Identify the upper limit of summation.

Substitute each value of

k

from the lower limit to the upper limit into the formula.

Add to find the sum.
::::

::: {#Example_11_04_01 .example}
Evaluate ∑ k=3 7 k 2 .

According to the notation, the lower limit of summation is 3 and the
upper limit is 7. So we need to find the sum of k 2 from k=3 to k=7. We
find the terms of the series by substituting k=3,4,5,6, and 7 into the
function k 2 . We add the terms to find the sum.

$$\begin{array}{ll}
{\sum\limits_{k = 3}^{7}k^{2}} & {= 3^{2} + 4^{2} + 5^{2} + 6^{2} + 7^{2}} \\
 & {= 9 + 16 + 25 + 36 + 49} \\
 & {= 135}
\end{array}$$
:::

:::: {#fs-id1165137482825 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Evaluate ∑ k=2 5 (3k--1) .

38
::::

# Using the Formula for Arithmetic Series {#fs-id1165137480338}

Just as we studied special types of sequences, we will look at special
types of series. Recall that an arithmetic sequence is a sequence in
which the difference between any two consecutive terms is the common
difference, d. The sum of the terms of an arithmetic sequence is called
an *arithmetic series*. We can write the sum of the first n terms of an
arithmetic series as:

$$S_{n} = a_{1} + (a_{1} + d) + (a_{1} + 2d) + ... + (a_{n}–d) + a_{n}.$$

We can also reverse the order of the terms and write the sum as

$$S_{n} = a_{n} + (a_{n}–d) + (a_{n}–2d) + ... + (a_{1} + d) + a_{1}.$$

If we add these two expressions for the sum of the first n terms of an
arithmetic series, we can derive a formula for the sum of the first n
terms of any arithmetic series.

$$\frac{\begin{array}{l}
{\mspace{9mu}\mspace{9mu}\mspace{9mu}\mspace{9mu}\mspace{9mu}\mspace{9mu} S_{n} = a_{1} + (a_{1} + d) + (a_{1} + 2d) + ... + (a_{n}–d) + a_{n}} \\
{+ \mspace{9mu}\mspace{9mu} S_{n} = a_{n} + (a_{n}–d) + (a_{n}–2d) + ... + (a_{1} + d) + a_{1}}
\end{array}}{2S_{n} = (a_{1} + a_{n}) + (a_{1} + a_{n}) + ... + (a_{1} + a_{n})}$$

Because there are n terms in the series, we can simplify this sum to

$$2S_{n} = n(a_{1} + a_{n}).$$

We divide by 2 to find the formula for the sum of the first n terms of
an arithmetic series.

$$S_{n} = \frac{n(a_{1} + a_{n})}{2}$$

:::: {#fs-id1165135506407 .note}
::: title
Formula for the Sum of the First *n* Terms of an Arithmetic Series
:::

An arithmetic series is the sum of the terms of an arithmetic sequence.
The formula for the sum of the first n terms of an arithmetic sequence
is

$$S_{n} = \frac{n(a_{1} + a_{n})}{2}$$
::::

:::: {#fs-id1165135255874 .note}
::: title
:::

How To

*Given terms of an arithmetic series, find the sum of the first n
terms.*

Identify

a

1

and

a

n

.

Determine

n

.

Substitute values for

a

1

, 

a

n

,

and

n

into the formula

S

n

=

n

(

a

1

\+

a

n

)

2

.

Simplify to find

S

n

.
::::

::: {#Example_11_04_02 .example}
Find the sum of each arithmetic series.

ⓐ

5 + 8 + 11 + 14 + 17 + 20 + 23 + 26 + 29 + 32

ⓑ

20 + 15 + 10 +...+ −50

ⓒ

∑

k

=

1

12

3

k

−

8

ⓐ

We are given a 1 =5 and a n =32.

Count the number of terms in the sequence to find n=10.

Substitute values for a 1 , a n , and n into the formula and simplify.

$$\begin{array}{l}
\begin{array}{l}
 \\
{~S_{n} = \frac{n(a_{1} + a_{n})}{2}}
\end{array} \\
{S_{10} = \frac{10(5 + 32)}{2} = 185}
\end{array}$$

ⓑ

We are given a 1 =20 and a n =−50.

Use the formula for the general term of an arithmetic sequence to find
n.

$$\begin{array}{l}
{\mspace{9mu}\mspace{9mu}\mspace{9mu}\mspace{9mu} a_{n} = a_{1} + (n - 1)d} \\
{- 50 = 20 + (n - 1)( - 5)} \\
{- 70 = (n - 1)( - 5)} \\
{\mspace{9mu}\mspace{9mu}\mspace{9mu}\mspace{9mu} 14 = n - 1} \\
{\mspace{9mu}\mspace{9mu}\mspace{9mu}\mspace{9mu} 15 = n}
\end{array}$$

Substitute values for a 1 , a n ,n into the formula and simplify.

$$\begin{array}{l}
\begin{array}{l}
 \\
{S_{n} = \frac{n(a_{1} + a_{n})}{2}}
\end{array} \\
{S_{15} = \frac{15(20 - 50)}{2} = - 225}
\end{array}$$

ⓒ

To find a 1 , substitute k=1 into the given explicit formula.

$$\begin{array}{l}
{a_{k} = 3k - 8} \\
{\mspace{9mu} a_{1} = 3(1) - 8 = - 5}
\end{array}$$

We are given that n=12. To find a 12 , substitute k=12 into the given
explicit formula.

$$\begin{array}{l}
{\mspace{9mu} a_{k} = 3k - 8} \\
{a_{12} = 3(12) - 8 = 28}
\end{array}$$

Substitute values for a 1 , a n , and n into the formula and simplify.

$$\begin{array}{l}
{\mspace{9mu} S_{n} = \frac{n(a_{1} + a_{n})}{2}} \\
{S_{12} = \frac{12( - 5 + 28)}{2} = 138}
\end{array}$$
:::

Use the formula to find the sum of each arithmetic series.

:::: {#fs-id1165134032286 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

1.4 + 1.6 + 1.8 + 2.0 + 2.2 + 2.4 + 2.6 + 2.8 + 3.0 + 3.2 + 3.4

26.4
::::

:::: {#eip-165 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

13 + 21 + 29 + ...+ 69

328
::::

:::: {#eip-687 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

∑ k=1 10 5 −6k

−280
::::

::: {#Example_11_04_03 .example}
On the Sunday after a minor surgery, a woman is able to walk a
half-mile. Each Sunday, she walks an additional quarter-mile. After 8
weeks, what will be the total number of miles she has walked?

This problem can be modeled by an arithmetic series with a 1 = 1 2 and
d= 1 4 . We are looking for the total number of miles walked after 8
weeks, so we know that n=8, and we are looking for S 8 . To find a 8 ,
we can use the explicit formula for an arithmetic sequence.

$$\begin{array}{l}
\begin{array}{l}
 \\
{a_{n} = a_{1} + d(n - 1)}
\end{array} \\
{a_{8} = \frac{1}{2} + \frac{1}{4}(8 - 1) = \frac{9}{4}}
\end{array}$$

We can now use the formula for arithmetic series.

$$\begin{array}{l}
{~S_{n} = \frac{n(a_{1} + a_{n})}{2}} \\
{\mspace{9mu}\ S_{8} = \frac{8(\frac{1}{2} + \frac{9}{4})}{2} = 11}
\end{array}$$

She will have walked a total of 11 miles.
:::

:::: {#fs-id1165137673666 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

A man earns \$100 in the first week of June. Each week, he earns \$12.50
more than the previous week. After 12 weeks, how much has he earned?

\$2,025
::::

# Using the Formula for Geometric Series {#fs-id1165137660105}

Just as the sum of the terms of an arithmetic sequence is called an
arithmetic series, the sum of the terms in a geometric sequence is
called a *geometric series*. Recall that a geometric sequence is a
sequence in which the ratio of any two consecutive terms is the common
ratio, r. We can write the sum of the first n terms of a geometric
series as

$$S_{n} = a_{1} + ra_{1} + r^{2}a_{1} + ... + r^{n–1}a_{1}.$$

Just as with arithmetic series, we can do some algebraic manipulation to
derive a formula for the sum of the first n terms of a geometric series.
We will begin by multiplying both sides of the equation by r.

$$rS_{n} = ra_{1} + r^{2}a_{1} + r^{3}a_{1} + ... + r^{n}a_{1}$$

Next, we subtract this equation from the original equation.

$$\begin{array}{l}
 \\
\frac{\begin{array}{l}
{\mspace{9mu}\text{~~~}S_{n} = a_{1} + ra_{1} + r^{2}a_{1} + ... + r^{n–1}a_{1}} \\
{- rS_{n} = - (ra_{1} + r^{2}a_{1} + r^{3}a_{1} + ... + r^{n}a_{1})}
\end{array}}{(1 - r)S_{n} = a_{1} - r^{n}a_{1}}
\end{array}$$

Notice that when we subtract, all but the first term of the top equation
and the last term of the bottom equation cancel out. To obtain a formula
for S n , divide both sides by (1−r).

$$S_{n} = \frac{a_{1}(1 - r^{n})}{1 - r}\mspace{9mu}\text{r} \neq \text{1}$$

:::: {#fs-id1165137533230 .note}
::: title
Formula for the Sum of the First *n* Terms of a Geometric Series
:::

A geometric series is the sum of the terms in a geometric sequence. The
formula for the sum of the first n terms of a geometric sequence is
represented as

$$S_{n} = \frac{a_{1}(1 - r^{n})}{1 - r}\mspace{9mu}\text{r} \neq \text{1}$$
::::

:::: {#fs-id1165137602804 .note}
::: title
:::

How To

Given a geometric series, find the sum of the first

n

terms.

Identify

a

1

,

r

,

and

n

.

Substitute values for

a

1

,

r

,

and

n

into the formula

S

n

=

a

1

(

1

--

r

n

)

1

--

r

.

Simplify to find

S

n

.
::::

::: {#Example_11_04_04 .example}
Use the formula to find the indicated partial sum of each geometric
series.

ⓐ

S

11

for the series

8 + -4 + 2 + 

...

ⓑ

∑

​

k

=

1

6

3

⋅

2

k

ⓐ

a 1 =8, and we are given that n=11.

We can find r by dividing the second term of the series by the first.

$$r = \frac{- 4}{8} = - \frac{1}{2}$$

Substitute values for a 1 , r, and n into the formula and simplify.

$$\begin{array}{l}
{S_{n} = \frac{a_{1}\left( {1 - r^{n}} \right)}{1 - r}} \\
{S_{11} = \frac{8\left( {1 - \left( {- \frac{1}{2}} \right)^{11}} \right)}{1 - \left( {- \frac{1}{2}} \right)} \approx 5.336}
\end{array}$$

ⓑ

Find a 1 by substituting k=1 into the given explicit formula.

$$a_{1} = 3 \cdot 2^{1} = 6$$

We can see from the given explicit formula that r=2. The upper limit of
summation is 6, so n=6.

Substitute values for a 1 ,r, and n into the formula, and simplify.

$$\begin{array}{l}
{S_{n} = \frac{a_{1}(1 - r^{n})}{1 - r}} \\
{S_{6} = \frac{6(1 - 2^{6})}{1 - 2} = 378}
\end{array}$$
:::

Use the formula to find the indicated partial sum of each geometric
series.

:::: {#fs-id1165134037663 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

S 20 for the series 1,000 + 500 + 250 + ...

≈2,000.00
::::

:::: {#eip-196 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

∑ k=1 8 3 k

9,840
::::

::: {#Example_11_04_05 .example}
At a new job, an employee's starting salary is \$26,750. He receives a
1.6% annual raise. Find his total earnings at the end of 5 years.

The problem can be represented by a geometric series with a 1 =26,750;
n=5; and r=1.016. Substitute values for a 1 , r, and n into the formula
and simplify to find the total amount earned at the end of 5 years.

$$\begin{array}{l}
{S_{n} = \frac{a_{1}(1 - r^{n})}{1 - r}} \\
{S_{5} = \frac{26\text{,}750(1 - 1.016^{5})}{1 - 1.016} \approx 138\text{,}099.03}
\end{array}$$

He will have earned a total of \$138,099.03 by the end of 5 years.
:::

:::: {#fs-id1165137705454 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

At a new job, an employee's starting salary is \$32,100. She receives a
2% annual raise. How much will she have earned by the end of 8 years?

\$275,513.31
::::

# Using the Formula for the Sum of an Infinite Geometric Series {#fs-id1165135527007}

Thus far, we have looked only at finite series. Sometimes, however, we
are interested in the sum of the terms of an infinite sequence rather
than the sum of only the first n terms. An infinite series is the sum of
the terms of an infinite sequence. An example of an infinite series is
2+4+6+8+\...

This series can also be written in summation notation as ∑ k=1 ∞ 2k,
where the upper limit of summation is infinity. Because the terms are
not tending to zero, the sum of the series increases without bound as we
add more terms. Therefore, the sum of this infinite series is not
defined. When the sum is not a real number, we say the series diverges.

## Determining Whether the Sum of an Infinite Geometric Series is Defined {#fs-id1165135368568}

If the terms of an infinite geometric sequence approach 0, the sum of an
infinite geometric series can be defined. The terms in this series
approach 0:

$$1 + 0.2 + 0.04 + 0.008 + 0.0016 + ...$$

The common ratio r= 0.2. As n gets very large, the values of r n get
very small and approach 0. Each successive term affects the sum less
than the preceding term. As each succeeding term gets closer to 0, the
sum of the terms approaches a finite value. The terms of any infinite
geometric series with −1\<r\<1 approach 0; the sum of a geometric series
is defined when −1\<r\<1.

:::: {#fs-id1165137643369 .note}
::: title
Determining Whether the Sum of an Infinite Geometric Series is Defined
:::

The sum of an infinite series is defined if the series is geometric and
−1\<r\<1.
::::

:::: {#fs-id1165137932657 .note}
::: title
:::

How To

*Given the first several terms of an infinite series, determine if the
sum of the series exists.*

Find the ratio of the second term to the first term.

Find the ratio of the third term to the second term.

Continue this process to ensure the ratio of a term to the preceding
term is constant throughout. If so, the series is geometric.

If a common ratio,

r

,

was found in step 3, check to see if

−

1

\<

r

\<

1

. If so, the sum is defined. If not, the sum is not defined.
::::

::: {#Example_11_04_06 .example}
Determine whether the sum of each infinite series is defined.

ⓐ

12 + 8 + 4 + 

...

ⓑ

3

4

\+

1

2

\+

1

3

\+

\...

ⓒ

∑

k

=

1

∞

27

⋅

(

1

3

)

k

ⓓ

∑

k

=

1

∞

5

k

ⓐ

The ratio of the second term to the first is

2

3

,

which is not the same as the ratio of the third term to the second,

1

2

.

The series is not geometric.

ⓑ

The ratio of the second term to the first is the same as the ratio of
the third term to the second. The series is geometric with a common
ratio of

2

3

.

The sum of the infinite series is defined.

ⓒ

The given formula is exponential with a base of

1

3

;

the series is geometric with a common ratio of

1

3

.

The sum of the infinite series is defined.

ⓓ

The given formula is not exponential; the series is not geometric
because the terms are increasing, and so cannot yield a finite sum.
:::

Determine whether the sum of the infinite series is defined.

:::: {#fs-id1165135497153 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

1 3 + 1 2 + 3 4 + 9 8 +\...

The sum is not defined.
::::

:::: {#eip-827 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

24+( −12 )+6+( −3 )+\...

The sum of the infinite series is defined.
::::

:::: {#eip-662 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

∑ k=1 ∞ 15⋅ (--0.3) k

The sum of the infinite series is defined.
::::

## Finding Sums of Infinite Series {#fs-id1165135437882}

When the sum of an infinite geometric series exists, we can calculate
the sum. The formula for the sum of an infinite series is related to the
formula for the sum of the first n terms of a geometric series.

$$S_{n} = \frac{a_{1}(1 - r^{n})}{1 - r}$$

We will examine an infinite series with r= 1 2 . What happens to r n as
n increases?

$$\begin{array}{l}
{\left( \frac{1}{2} \right)^{2} = \frac{1}{4}} \\
{\left( \frac{1}{2} \right)^{3} = \frac{1}{8}} \\
{\left( \frac{1}{2} \right)^{4} = \frac{1}{16}}
\end{array}$$

The value of r n decreases rapidly. What happens for greater values of
n?

$$\begin{array}{l}
{{(\frac{1}{2})}^{10} = \frac{1}{1\text{,}024}} \\
{{(\frac{1}{2})}^{20} = \frac{1}{1\text{,}048\text{,}576}} \\
{{(\frac{1}{2})}^{30} = \frac{1}{1\text{,}073\text{,}741\text{,}824}}
\end{array}$$

As n gets very large, r n gets very small. We say that, as n increases
without bound, r n approaches 0. As r n approaches 0, 1− r n
approaches 1. When this happens, the numerator approaches a 1 . This
give us a formula for the sum of an infinite geometric series.

:::: {#fs-id1165135187529 .note}
::: title
Formula for the Sum of an Infinite Geometric Series
:::

The formula for the sum of an infinite geometric series with −1\<r\<1 is

$$S = \frac{a_{1}}{1 - r}$$
::::

:::: {#fs-id1165135190124 .note}
::: title
:::

How To

*Given an infinite geometric series, find its sum.*

Identify

a

1

and

r

.

Confirm that

--

1

\<

r

\<

1\.

Substitute values for

a

1

and

r

into the formula,

S

=

a

1

1

−

r

.

Simplify to find

S

.
::::

::: {#Example_11_04_07 .example}
Find the sum, if it exists, for the following:

ⓐ

10

\+

9

\+

8

\+

7

\+

...

ⓑ

248.6

\+

99.44

\+

39.776

\+

...

ⓒ

∑

k

=

1

∞

4

,

374

⋅

(

--

1

3

)

k

--

1

ⓓ

∑

k

=

1

∞

1

9

⋅

(

4

3

)

k

ⓐ

There is not a constant ratio; the series is not geometric.

ⓑ

There is a constant ratio; the series is geometric. a 1 =248.6 and r=
99.44 248.6 =0.4, so the sum exists. Substitute a 1 =248.6 and r=0.4
into the formula and simplify to find the sum:

$$\begin{array}{l}
{S = \frac{a_{1}}{1 - r}} \\
{S = \frac{248.6}{1 - 0.4} = 414.\overline{3}}
\end{array}$$

ⓒ

The formula is exponential, so the series is geometric with r=-- 1 3 .
Find a 1 by substituting k=1 into the given explicit formula:

$$a_{1} = 4\text{,}374 \cdot {(–\frac{1}{3})}^{1–1} = 4\text{,}374$$

Substitute a 1 =4,374 and r=− 1 3 into the formula, and simplify to find
the sum:

$$\begin{array}{l}
{S = \frac{a_{1}}{1 - r}} \\
{S = \frac{4\text{,}374}{1 - ( - \frac{1}{3})} = 3\text{,}280.5}
\end{array}$$

ⓓ

The formula is exponential, so the series is geometric, but

r

\>

1\.

The sum does not exist.
:::

::: {#Example_11_04_08 .example}
Find an equivalent fraction for the repeating decimal 0.3¯

We notice the repeating decimal 0.3¯ =0.333\... so we can rewrite the
repeating decimal as a sum of terms.

$$0.\overline{3} = 0.3 + 0.03 + 0.003 + ...$$

Looking for a pattern, we rewrite the sum, noticing that we see the
first term multiplied to 0.1 in the second term, and the second term
multiplied to 0.1 in the third term.

Notice the pattern; we multiply each consecutive term by a common ratio
of 0.1 starting with the first term of 0.3. So, substituting into our
formula for an infinite geometric sum, we have

$$S_{n} = \frac{a_{1}}{1 - r} = \frac{0.3}{1 - 0.1} = \frac{0.3}{0.9} = \frac{1}{3}.$$
:::

Find the sum, if it exists.

:::: {#fs-id1165135208424 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

2+ 2 3 + 2 9 +\...

3
::::

:::: {#eip-id1387862 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

∑ k=1 ∞ 0.76k+1

The series is not geometric.
::::

:::: {#eip-id1387940 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

∑ k=1 ∞ ( − 3 8 ) k

− 3 11
::::

# Solving Annuity Problems {#fs-id1165135390954}

At the beginning of the section, we looked at a problem in which a
parent invested a set amount of money each month into a college fund for
six years. An annuity is an investment in which the purchaser makes a
sequence of periodic, equal payments. To find the amount of an annuity,
we need to find the sum of all the payments and the interest earned. In
the example, the parent invests \$50 each month. This is the value of
the initial deposit. The account paid 6% annual interest, compounded
monthly. To find the interest rate per payment period, we need to divide
the 6% annual percentage interest (APR) rate by 12. So the monthly
interest rate is 0.5%. We can multiply the amount in the account each
month by 100.5% to find the value of the account after interest has been
added.

We can find the value of the annuity right after the last deposit by
using a geometric series with a 1 =50 and r=100.5%=1.005. After the
first deposit, the value of the annuity will be \$50. Let us see if we
can determine the amount in the college fund and the interest earned.

We can find the value of the annuity after n deposits using the formula
for the sum of the first n terms of a geometric series. In 6 years,
there are 72 months, so n=72. We can substitute a 1
=50, r=1.005, and n=72 into the formula, and simplify to find the value
of the annuity after 6 years.

$$S_{72} = \frac{50(1 - 1.005^{72})}{1 - 1.005} \approx 4\text{,}320.44$$

After the last deposit, the parent will have a total of \$4,320.44 in
the account. Notice, the parent made 72 payments of \$50 each for a
total of 72(50) = \$3,600. This means that because of the annuity, the
parent earned \$720.44 interest in their college fund.

:::: {#fs-id1165135510774 .note}
::: title
:::

How To

*Given an initial deposit and an interest rate, find the value of an
annuity.*

Determine

a

1

,

the value of the initial deposit.

Determine

n

,

the number of deposits.

Determine

r

.

Divide the annual interest rate by the number of times per year that
interest is compounded.

Add 1 to this amount to find

r

.

Substitute values for

a

1

,

r

,

and

n

into the formula for the sum of the first

n

terms of a geometric series,

S

n

=

a

1

(

1

--

r

n

)

1

--

r

.

Simplify to find

S

n

,

the value of the annuity after

n

deposits.
::::

::: {#Example_11_04_09 .example}
A deposit of \$100 is placed into a college fund at the beginning of
every month for 10 years. The fund earns 9% annual interest, compounded
monthly, and paid at the end of the month. How much is in the account
right after the last deposit?

The value of the initial deposit is \$100, so a 1 =100. A total of 120
monthly deposits are made in the 10 years, so n=120. To find r, divide
the annual interest rate by 12 to find the monthly interest rate and add
1 to represent the new monthly deposit.

$$r = 1 + \frac{0.09}{12} = 1.0075$$

Substitute a 1 =100,r=1.0075,andn=120 into the formula for the sum of
the first n terms of a geometric series, and simplify to find the value
of the annuity.

$$S_{120} = \frac{100(1 - 1.0075^{120})}{1 - 1.0075} \approx 19\text{,}351.43$$

So the account has \$19,351.43 after the last deposit is made.
:::

:::: {#fs-id1165135503821 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

At the beginning of each month, \$200 is deposited into a retirement
fund. The fund earns 6% annual interest, compounded monthly, and paid
into the account at the end of the month. How much is in the account if
deposits are made for 10 years?

\$32,775.87
::::

:::: {#fs-id1165137725119 .note}
::: title
:::

Media

Access these online resources for additional instruction and practice
with series.

Arithmetic Series

Geometric Series

Summation Notation
::::

# Key Equations {#fs-id1165137740973}

  ---------------------------------------------------- ------------------------------
  sum of the first n terms of an arithmetic series     S n = n( a 1 + a n ) 2
  sum of the first n terms of a geometric series       S n = a 1 (1− r n ) 1−r ,r≠1
  sum of an infinite geometric series with --1\<r\<1   S n = a 1 1−r ,r≠1
  ---------------------------------------------------- ------------------------------

# Key Concepts {#fs-id1165137834434}

The sum of the terms in a sequence is called a series.

A common notation for series is called summation notation, which uses
the Greek letter sigma to represent the sum. See

.

The sum of the terms in an arithmetic sequence is called an arithmetic
series.

The sum of the first

n

terms of an arithmetic series can be found using a formula. See

and

.

The sum of the terms in a geometric sequence is called a geometric
series.

The sum of the first

n

terms of a geometric series can be found using a formula. See

and

.

The sum of an infinite series exists if the series is geometric with

--1

\<

r

\<

1\.

If the sum of an infinite series exists, it can be found using a
formula. See

,

, and

.

An annuity is an account into which the investor makes a series of
regularly scheduled payments. The value of an annuity can be found using
geometric series. See

.

# Section Exercises {#fs-id1165134109732}

## Verbal {#fs-id1165135639904}

What is an nth partial sum?

An nth partial sum is the sum of the first n terms of a sequence.

What is the difference between an arithmetic sequence and an arithmetic
series?

What is a geometric series?

A geometric series is the sum of the terms in a geometric sequence.

How is finding the sum of an infinite geometric series different from
finding the nth partial sum?

What is an annuity?

An annuity is a series of regular equal payments that earn a constant
compounded interest.

## Algebraic {#fs-id1165135193172}

For the following exercises, express each description of a sum using
summation notation.

The sum of terms m 2 +3m from m=1 to m=5

The sum from of n=0 to n=4 of 5n

∑ n=0 4 5n

The sum of 6k−5 from k=−2 to k=1

The sum that results from adding the number 4 five times

∑ k=1 5 4

For the following exercises, express each arithmetic sum using summation
notation.

5+10+15+20+25+30+35+40+45+50

10+18+26+...+162

∑ k=1 20 8k+2

1 2 +1+ 3 2 +2+...+4

For the following exercises, use the formula for the sum of the first n
terms of each arithmetic sequence.

3 2 +2+ 5 2 +3+ 7 2

S 5 = 5( 3 2 + 7 2 ) 2

19+25+31+...+73

3.2+3.4+3.6+...+5.6

S 13 = 13( 3.2+5.6 ) 2

For the following exercises, express each geometric sum using summation
notation.

1+3+9+27+81+243+729+2187

8+4+2+...+0.125

∑ k=1 7 8⋅ 0.5 k−1

− 1 6 + 1 12 − 1 24 +...+ 1 768

For the following exercises, use the formula for the sum of the first n
terms of each geometric sequence, and then state the indicated sum.

9+3+1+ 1 3 + 1 9

S 5 = 9( 1− ( 1 3 ) 5 ) 1− 1 3 = 121 9 ≈13.44

∑ n=1 9 5⋅ 2 n−1

∑ a=1 11 64⋅ 0.2 a−1

S 11 = 64( 1− 0.2 11 ) 1−0.2 = 781,249,984 9,765,625 ≈80

For the following exercises, determine whether the infinite series has a
sum. If so, write the formula for the sum. If not, state the reason.

12+18+24+30+\...

2+1.6+1.28+1.024+\...

The series is defined. S= 2 1−0.8

∑ m=1 ∞ 4 m−1

∑ ​ ∞ k=1 − ( − 1 2 ) k−1

The series is defined. S= −1 1−( − 1 2 )

## Graphical {#fs-id1165137827903}

For the following exercises, use the following scenario. Javier makes
monthly deposits into a savings account. He opened the account with an
initial deposit of \$50. Each month thereafter he increased the previous
deposit amount by \$20.

Graph the arithmetic sequence showing one year of Javier's deposits.

Graph the arithmetic series showing the monthly sums of one year of
Javier's deposits.

For the following exercises, use the geometric series ∑ k=1 ∞ ( 1 2 ) k
.

Graph the first 7 partial sums of the series.

What number does S n seem to be approaching in the graph? Find the sum
to explain why this makes sense.

Sample answer: The graph of S n seems to be approaching 1. This makes
sense because ∑ k=1 ∞ ( 1 2 ) k is a defined infinite geometric series
with S= 1 2 1--( 1 2 ) =1.

## Numeric {#fs-id1165135203672}

For the following exercises, find the indicated sum.

∑ a=1 14 a

∑ n=1 6 n(n−2)

49

∑ k=1 17 k 2

∑ k=1 7 2 k

254

For the following exercises, use the formula for the sum of the first n
terms of an arithmetic series to find the sum.

−1.7+−0.4+0.9+2.2+3.5+4.8

6+ 15 2 +9+ 21 2 +12+ 27 2 +15

S 7 = 147 2

−1+3+7+\...+31

∑ k=1 11 ( k 2 − 1 2 )

S 11 = 55 2

For the following exercises, use the formula for the sum of the first n
terms of a geometric series to find the partial sum.

S 6 for the series −2−10−50−250\...

S 7 for the series 0.4−2+10−50\...

S 7 =5208.4

∑ k=1 9 2 k−1

∑ n=1 10 −2⋅ ( 1 2 ) n−1

S 10 =− 1023 256

For the following exercises, find the sum of the infinite geometric
series.

4+2+1+ 1 2 \...

−1− 1 4 − 1 16 − 1 64 \...

S=− 4 3

∑ ​ ∞ k=1 3⋅ ( 1 4 ) k−1

∑ n=1 ∞ 4.6⋅ 0.5 n−1

S=9.2

For the following exercises, determine the value of the annuity for the
indicated monthly deposit amount, the number of deposits, and the
interest rate.

Deposit amount: \$50; total deposits: 60; interest rate: 5%, compounded
monthly

Deposit amount: \$150; total deposits: 24; interest rate: 3%, compounded
monthly

\$3,705.42

Deposit amount: \$450; total deposits: 60; interest rate: 4.5%,
compounded quarterly

Deposit amount: \$100; total deposits: 120; interest rate: 10%,
compounded semi-annually

\$695,823.97

## Extensions {#fs-id1165135481996}

The sum of terms 50− k 2 from k=x through 7 is 115. What is *x*?

Write an explicit formula for a k such that ∑ k=0 6 a k =189. Assume
this is an arithmetic series.

a k =30−k

Find the smallest value of *n* such that ∑ k=1 n (3k--5)\>100.

How many terms must be added before the series −1−3−5−7\.... has a sum
less than −75?

9 terms

Write 0. 65 ¯ as an infinite geometric series using summation notation.
Then use the formula for finding the sum of an infinite geometric series
to convert 0. 65 ¯ to a fraction.

The sum of an infinite geometric series is five times the value of the
first term. What is the common ratio of the series?

r= 4 5

To get the best loan rates available, the Coleman family want to save
enough money to place 20% down on a \$160,000 home. They plan to make
monthly deposits of \$125 in an investment account that offers 8.5%
annual interest compounded semi-annually. Will the Colemans have enough
for a 20% down payment after five years of saving? How much money will
they have saved?

Karl has two years to save \$10,000 to buy a used car when he graduates.
To the nearest dollar, what would his monthly deposits need to be if he
invests in an account offering a 4.2% annual interest rate that
compounds monthly?

\$400 per month

## Real-World Applications {#fs-id1165135187471}

Keisha devised a week-long study plan to prepare for finals. On the
first day, she plans to study for 1 hour, and each successive day she
will increase her study time by 30 minutes. How many hours will Keisha
have studied after one week?

A boulder rolled down a mountain, traveling 6 feet in the first second.
Each successive second, its distance increased by 8 feet. How far did
the boulder travel after 10 seconds?

420 feet

A scientist places 50 cells in a petri dish. Every hour, the population
increases by 1.5%. What will the cell count be after 1 day?

A pendulum travels a distance of 3 feet on its first swing. On each
successive swing, it travels 3 4 the distance of the previous swing.
What is the total distance traveled by the pendulum when it stops
swinging?

12 feet

Rachael deposits \$1,500 into a retirement fund each year. The fund
earns 8.2% annual interest, compounded monthly. If she opened her
account when she was 19 years old, how much will she have by the time
she is 55? How much of that amount will be interest earned?

# 

annuity

an investment in which the purchaser makes a sequence of periodic, equal
payments

arithmetic series

the sum of the terms in an arithmetic sequence

diverge

a series is said to diverge if the sum is not a real number

geometric series

the sum of the terms in a geometric sequence

index of summation

in summation notation, the variable used in the explicit formula for the
terms of a series and written below the sigma with the lower limit of
summation

infinite series

the sum of the terms in an infinite sequence

lower limit of summation

the number used in the explicit formula to find the first term in a
series

nth partial sum

the sum of the first

n

terms of a sequence

series

the sum of the terms in a sequence

summation notation

a notation for series using the Greek letter sigma; it includes an
explicit formula and specifies the first and last terms in the series

upper limit of summation

the number used in the explicit formula to find the last term in a
series
