m49448

> In this section, you will:
>
> Solve counting problems using the Addition Principle.
>
> Solve counting problems using the Multiplication Principle.
>
> Solve counting problems using permutations involving n distinct
> objects.
>
> Solve counting problems using combinations.
>
> Find the number of subsets of a given set.
>
> Solve counting problems using permutations involving n non-distinct
> objects.

3183f5f9-230d-4777-b547-67eda9631a22

#  {#eip-215}

## Learning Objectives {#eip-603}

Solve counting problems using the addition principle.

Solve counting problems using the multiplication principle.

## Objective 1: Solve counting problems using the addition principle. {#eip-823}

In probability theory, an outcome is a possible result of an experiment
or trial.

In probability theory, an event is a set of outcomes of an experiment.

Disjoint events cannot happen at the same time. In other words, they are
mutually exclusive.

:::: {#eip-44 .note}
::: title
The Addition Principle
:::

The

Addition Principle

states that if one event can occur in A ways (A outcomes) and a second
event can occur in B ways (B outcomes) and both events cannot occur at
the same time (A and B disjoints) then there are A + B ways (A+B
outcomes) for the first event or the second event to occur.
::::

The *addition principle* applies when we are making *only one
selection*.

::: {#eip-640 .example}
ⓐ Seven red and five green marbles are placed in a bag. How many marbles
are there to choose from?

ⓑ Let the set A = {−5,−3,−1,2,3,4,5,6}. How many ways are there to
choose a negative or an even number from A?

ⓒ A student is shopping for a new computer. He is deciding among 2
desktop computers and 3 laptop computers. What is the total number of
computer options?

ⓐ There are 7 ways of picking a red marble and 5 ways of picking a green
marble and we cannot pick a red and a green at the same time. Therefore,
there are 7+5 = 12 ways of picking a marble.

ⓑ There are 3 negative numbers in A and 3 even numbers in A and the even
numbers are not negative. Therefore, there are 3+3 = 6 ways of choosing
a negative or an even number from A.

ⓒ There are 2 options for a desktop and 3 options for a laptop and the
student is shopping for one computer. So, he cannot pick both.
Therefore, there are 2+3 = 5 total computer options.
:::

### Practice Makes Perfect {#eip-946}

Solve counting problems using the addition principle.

Ten red and six green marbles are placed in a bag. How many marbles are
there to choose from?

Let the set A = {−5,−3,−1,2,3,4,5,6}. How many ways are there to choose
a positive or an odd number from A?

A young boy is deciding on a snack for the afternoon. He is deciding
among 5 different chips, 3 different fruits and 2 different vegetables.
What is the total number of snack options?

## Objective 2: Solve counting problems using the multiplication principle. {#eip-969}

:::: {#eip-406 .note}
::: title
The Multiplication Principle
:::

The

Multiplication Principle

states that if one event can occur in A ways (A outcomes) and a second
event can occur in B ways (B outcomes) after the first event has
occurred then the two events can occur in

A

⋅

B

ways. This is also known as the Fundamental Counting Principle.
::::

The *Multiplication Principle* applies when we are making *more than one
selection*.

::: {#eip-789 .example}
Solve counting problems using the multiplication principle.

ⓐ

Diane packed 2 skirts, 3 blouses, and 2 sweaters for her business trip.
She will need to choose a skirt and a blouse for each outfit and decide
whether to wear the sweater. Use the Multiplication Principle to find
the total number of possible outfits.

ⓑ

A restaurant offers a lunch special that includes an entree, a main
dish, and a beverage. There are 3 types of entrees, 4 main dish options,
and 5 beverage choices. Find the total number of possible lunch
specials.

ⓒ

Next semester you are going to take one science class, one math class,
one history class and one english class. According to the schedule you
have 4 different science classes, 3 different math classes, 2 different
history classes, and 3 different English classes to choose from.
Assuming no scheduling conflicts, how many different four-course
selections can you make?

ⓓ

How many license plates consisting of 2 letters followed by 4 digits are
possible?

ⓐ

There are 2 outcomes for the skirts, 3 outcomes for the blouses and 2
outcomes for the sweaters. The total number of possible outfits is then:

2

⏟

·

3

⏟

·

2

⏟

=

12

Skirts

Blouses

Sweaters

ⓑ

There are 3 outcomes for the entrees, 4 outcomes for the main dish and 5
outcomes for the beverages. The total number of lunch specials is:

3

⏟

·

4

⏟

·

5

⏟

=

60

Entrees

Main Dish

Beverages

ⓒ

There are 4 outcomes for the science class, 3 outcomes for the math
class, 2 outcomes for the history class, and 3 outcomes for the English
class. The total number of 4-course selections is:

4

⏟

·

3

⏟

·

2

⏟

·

3

⏟

=

72

Science

Math

English

History

ⓓ

There are 26 outcomes for the 1st letter, 26 outcomes for the second
letter, 10 outcomes for the first digit, 10 outcomes for the second
digit, 10 outcomes for the third digit, and 10 outcomes for the 4th
digit. The number of license plates is:

26

⏟

·

26

⏟

·

10

⏟

·

10

⏟

·

10

⏟

·

10

⏟

=

6

,

760

,

000

1

st letter

2

nd letter

1

st digit

2

nd digit

3

rd digit

4

th digit
:::

### Practice Makes Perfect {#eip-729}

Solve counting problems using the multiplication principle.

How many two-letter strings---the first letter from set A and the second
letter from set B can be formed from the sets A = {b, c, d} and B = {a,
e, i, o, u}? 

If you have three types of meat to make a sandwich (turkey, roast beef,
and ham), and two types of bread (wheat and rye), how many different
sandwiches with one kind of meat can be created?

Next semester you are going to take one science class, one math class,
one history class and one english class. According to the schedule you
have 4 different science classes, 3 different math classes, 2 different
history classes, and 3 different English classes to choose from.
Assuming no scheduling conflicts, how many different four-course
selections can you make?

In Missouri, license plates have 3 letters and 3 numbers. How many
license plates, consisting of 3 letters followed by 3 digits are
possible?

A new company sells customizable cases for tablets and smartphones. Each
case comes in a variety of colors and can be personalized for an
additional fee with images or a monogram. A customer can choose not to
personalize or could choose to have one, two, or three images or a
monogram. The customer can choose the order of the images and the
letters in the monogram. The company is working with an agency to
develop a marketing campaign with a focus on the huge number of options
they offer. Counting the possibilities is challenging!

We encounter a wide variety of counting problems every day. There is a
branch of mathematics devoted to the study of counting problems such as
this one. Other applications of counting include secure passwords, horse
racing outcomes, and college scheduling choices. We will examine this
type of mathematics in this section.

# Using the Addition Principle {#fs-id1165137463810}

The company that sells customizable cases offers cases for tablets and
smartphones. There are 3 supported tablet models and 5 supported
smartphone models. The *Addition Principle* tells us that we can add the
number of tablet options to the number of smartphone options to find the
total number of options. By the Addition Principle, there are 8 total
options, as we can see in [\#](#).

<figure id="CNX_Precalc_Figure_11_05_001">

</figure>

:::: {#fs-id1165135186420 .note}
::: title
The Addition Principle
:::

According to the Addition Principle, if one event can occur in m ways
and a second event with no common outcomes can occur in n ways, then the
first *or* second event can occur in m+n ways.
::::

::: {#Example_11_05_01 .example}
There are 2 vegetarian entrée options and 5 meat entrée options on a
dinner menu. What is the total number of entrée options?

We can add the number of vegetarian options to the number of meat
options to find the total number of entrée options.

There are 7 total options.
:::

:::: {#fs-id1165137843834 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

A student is shopping for a new computer. He is deciding among 3 desktop
computers and 4 laptop computers. What is the total number of computer
options?

7
::::

# Using the Multiplication Principle {#fs-id1165137645260}

The *Multiplication Principle* applies when we are making more than one
selection. Suppose we are choosing an appetizer, an entrée, and a
dessert. If there are 2 appetizer options, 3 entrée options, and 2
dessert options on a fixed-price dinner menu, there are a total of 12
possible choices of one each as shown in the tree diagram in [\#](#).

<figure id="CNX_Precalculus_Figure_11_05_003">

</figure>

The possible choices are:

soup, chicken, cake

soup, chicken, pudding

soup, fish, cake

soup, fish, pudding

soup, steak, cake

soup, steak, pudding

salad, chicken, cake

salad, chicken, pudding

salad, fish, cake

salad, fish, pudding

salad, steak, cake

salad, steak, pudding

We can also find the total number of possible dinners by multiplying.

We could also conclude that there are 12 possible dinner choices simply
by applying the Multiplication Principle.

$$\begin{array}{llll}
{\#\mspace{9mu}\text{of~appetizer~options~} \times} & {\#\mspace{9mu}\text{of~entree~options~} \times} & {\#\mspace{9mu}\text{of~dessert~options}} & \\
{\mspace{9mu}\text{~~~~~~~~~~~~~~}2\mspace{9mu}\text{~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~} \times} & {\mspace{9mu}\text{~~~~~~~~~~~~~}3\mspace{9mu}\text{~~~~~~~~~~~~~~} \times} & {\mspace{9mu}\text{~~~~~~~~~~~~~~}2} & {= 12}
\end{array}$$

:::: {#fs-id1165137560649 .note}
::: title
The Multiplication Principle
:::

According to the Multiplication Principle, if one event can occur in m
ways and a second event can occur in n ways after the first event has
occurred, then the two events can occur in m×n ways. This is also known
as the Fundamental Counting Principle.
::::

::: {#Example_11_05_02 .example}
Diane packed 2 skirts, 4 blouses, and a sweater for her business trip.
She will need to choose a skirt and a blouse for each outfit and decide
whether to wear the sweater. Use the Multiplication Principle to find
the total number of possible outfits.

To find the total number of outfits, find the product of the number of
skirt options, the number of blouse options, and the number of sweater
options.

There are 16 possible outfits.
:::

:::: {#fs-id1165137398102 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

A restaurant offers a breakfast special that includes a breakfast
sandwich, a side dish, and a beverage. There are 3 types of breakfast
sandwiches, 4 side dish options, and 5 beverage choices. Find the total
number of possible breakfast specials.

There are 60 possible breakfast specials.
::::

# Finding the Number of Permutations of *n* Distinct Objects {#fs-id1165137553058}

The Multiplication Principle can be used to solve a variety of problem
types. One type of problem involves placing objects in order. We arrange
letters into words and digits into numbers, line up for photographs,
decorate rooms, and more. An ordering of objects is called a
permutation.

## Finding the Number of Permutations of *n* Distinct Objects Using the Multiplication Principle {#fs-id1165137678383}

To solve permutation problems, it is often helpful to draw line segments
for each option. That enables us to determine the number of each option
so we can multiply. For instance, suppose we have four paintings, and we
want to find the number of ways we can hang three of the paintings in
order on the wall. We can draw three lines to represent the three places
on the wall.

There are four options for the first place, so we write a 4 on the first
line.

After the first place has been filled, there are three options for the
second place so we write a 3 on the second line.

After the second place has been filled, there are two options for the
third place so we write a 2 on the third line. Finally, we find the
product.

There are 24 possible permutations of the paintings.

:::: {#fs-id1165137731358 .note}
::: title
:::

How To

*Given* n *distinct options, determine how many permutations there are.*

Determine how many options there are for the first situation.

Determine how many options are left for the second situation.

Continue until all of the spots are filled.

Multiply the numbers together.
::::

::: {#Example_11_05_03 .example}
At a swimming competition, nine swimmers compete in a race.

ⓐ

How many ways can they place first, second, and third?

ⓑ

How many ways can they place first, second, and third if a swimmer named
Ariel wins first place? (Assume there is only one contestant named
Ariel.)

ⓒ

How many ways can all nine swimmers line up for a photo?

ⓐ

Draw lines for each place.

There are 9 options for first place. Once someone has won first place,
there are 8 remaining options for second place. Once first and second
place have been won, there are 7 remaining options for third place.

Multiply to find that there are 504 ways for the swimmers to place.

ⓑ

Draw lines for describing each place.

We know Ariel must win first place, so there is only 1 option for first
place. There are 8 remaining options for second place, and then 7
remaining options for third place.

Multiply to find that there are 56 ways for the swimmers to place if
Ariel wins first.

ⓒ

Draw lines for describing each place in the photo.

There are 9 choices for the first spot, then 8 for the second, 7 for the
third, 6 for the fourth, and so on until only 1 person remains for the
last spot.

There are 362,880 possible permutations for the swimmers to line up.

Note that in part c, we found there were 9! ways for 9 people to line
up. The number of permutations of n distinct objects can always be found
by n!.
:::

A family of five is having portraits taken. Use the Multiplication
Principle to find the following.

:::: {#eip-id2465210 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

How many ways can the family line up for the portrait?

120
::::

:::: {#eip-id2465241 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

How many ways can the photographer line up 3 family members?

60
::::

:::: {#eip-id2465272 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

How many ways can the family line up for the portrait if the parents are
required to stand on each end?

12
::::

## Finding the Number of Permutations of *n* Distinct Objects Using a Formula {#fs-id1165137698292}

For some permutation problems, it is inconvenient to use the
Multiplication Principle because there are so many numbers to multiply.
Fortunately, we can solve these problems using a formula. Before we
learn the formula, let's look at two common notations for permutations.
If we have a set of n objects and we want to choose r objects from the
set in order, we write P(n,r). Another way to write this is n P r , a
notation commonly seen on computers and calculators. To calculate
P(n,r), we begin by finding n!, the number of ways to line up all n
objects. We then divide by ( n−r )! to cancel out the ( n−r ) items that
we do not wish to line up.

Let's see how this works with a simple example. Imagine a club of six
people. They need to elect a president, a vice president, and a
treasurer. Six people can be elected president, any one of the five
remaining people can be elected vice president, and any of the remaining
four people could be elected treasurer. The number of ways this may be
done is 6×5×4=120. Using factorials, we get the same result.

$$\frac{6!}{3!} = \frac{6 \cdot 5 \cdot 4 \cdot 3!}{3!} = 6 \cdot 5 \cdot 4 = 120$$

There are 120 ways to select 3 officers in order from a club with 6
members. We refer to this as a permutation of 6 taken 3 at a time. The
general formula is as follows.

$$P(n,r) = \frac{n!}{(n - r)!}$$

Note that the formula stills works if we are choosing *all* n objects
and placing them in order. In that case we would be dividing by ( n−n )!
or 0!, which we said earlier is equal to 1. So the number of
permutations of n objects taken n at a time is n! 1 or just n!.

:::: {#fs-id1165137657370 .note}
::: title
Formula for Permutations of *n* Distinct Objects
:::

Given n distinct objects, the number of ways to select r objects from
the set in order is

$$P(n,r) = \frac{n!}{(n - r)!}$$
::::

:::: {#fs-id1165137644544 .note}
::: title
:::

How To

*Given a word problem, evaluate the possible permutations.*

Identify

n

from the given information.

Identify

r

from the given information.

Replace

n

and

r

in the formula with the given values.

Evaluate.
::::

::: {#Example_11_05_04 .example}
A professor is creating an exam of 9 questions from a test bank of 12
questions. How many ways can she select and arrange the questions?

Substitute n=12 and r=9 into the permutation formula and simplify.

$$\begin{array}{l}
{\mspace{9mu}\ P(n,r) = \frac{n!}{(n - r)!}\mspace{9mu}} \\
{P(12,9) = \frac{12!}{(12 - 9)!} = \frac{12!}{3!} = 79\text{,}833\text{,}600}
\end{array}$$

There are 79,833,600 possible permutations of exam questions!

We can also use a calculator to find permutations. For this problem, we
would enter 12, press the n P r function, enter 9, and then press the
equal sign. The n P r function may be located under the MATH menu with
probability commands.
:::

:::: {#fs-id1165137386959 .note}
::: title
:::

Q&A

*Could we have solved [\#](#) using the Multiplication Principle?*

*Yes. We could have multiplied* 12⋅11⋅10⋅9⋅8⋅7⋅6⋅5⋅4 *to find the same
answer*.
::::

A play has a cast of 7 actors preparing to make their curtain call. Use
the permutation formula to find the following.

:::: {#eip-id1636733 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

How many ways can the 7 actors line up?

P(7,7)=5,040
::::

:::: {#eip-id1681009 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

How many ways can 5 of the 7 actors be chosen to line up?

P(7,5)=2,520
::::

# Find the Number of Combinations Using the Formula {#fs-id1165137648225}

So far, we have looked at problems asking us to put objects in order.
There are many problems in which we want to select a few objects from a
group of objects, but we do not care about the order. When we are
selecting objects and the order does not matter, we are dealing with
combinations. A selection of r objects from a set of n objects where the
order does not matter can be written as C(n,r). Just as with
permutations, C(n,r) can also be written as n C r . In this case, the
general formula is as follows.

$$\text{C}(n,r) = \frac{n!}{r!(n - r)!}$$

An earlier problem considered choosing 3 of 4 possible paintings to hang
on a wall. We found that there were 24 ways to select 3 of the 4
paintings in order. But what if we did not care about the order? We
would expect a smaller number because selecting paintings 1, 2, 3 would
be the same as selecting paintings 2, 3, 1. To find the number of ways
to select 3 of the 4 paintings, disregarding the order of the paintings,
divide the number of permutations by the number of ways to order 3
paintings. There are 3!=3·2·1=6 ways to order 3 paintings. There are 24
6 , or 4 ways to select 3 of the 4 paintings. This number makes sense
because every time we are selecting 3 paintings, we are *not* selecting
1 painting. There are 4 paintings we could choose *not* to select, so
there are 4 ways to select 3 of the 4 paintings.

:::: {#fs-id1165137731115 .note}
::: title
Formula for Combinations of *n* Distinct Objects
:::

Given n distinct objects, the number of ways to select r objects from
the set is

$$\text{C}(n,r) = \frac{n!}{r!(n - r)!}$$
::::

:::: {#fs-id1165137433362 .note}
::: title
:::

How To

*Given a number of options, determine the possible number of
combinations.*

Identify

n

from the given information.

Identify

r

from the given information.

Replace

n

and

r

in the formula with the given values.

Evaluate.
::::

::: {#Example_11_05_05 .example}
A fast food restaurant offers five side dish options. Your meal comes
with two side dishes.

ⓐ

How many ways can you select your side dishes?

ⓑ

How many ways can you select 3 side dishes?

ⓐ

We want to choose 2 side dishes from 5 options.

$$\text{C}(5,2) = \frac{5!}{2!(5 - 2)!} = 10$$

ⓑ

We want to choose 3 side dishes from 5 options.

$$\text{C}(5,3) = \frac{5!}{3!(5 - 3)!} = 10$$

We can also use a graphing calculator to find combinations. Enter 5,
then press n C r , enter 3, and then press the equal sign. The n C r ,
function may be located under the MATH menu with probability commands.
:::

:::: {#fs-id1165137558537 .note}
::: title
:::

Q&A

*Is it a coincidence that parts (a) and (b) in [\#](#) have the same
answers?*

*No. When we choose r objects from n objects, we are *not* choosing
(n--r) objects. Therefore, C(n,r)=C(n,n--r).*
::::

:::: {#fs-id1165137457211 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

An ice cream shop offers 10 flavors of ice cream. How many ways are
there to choose 3 flavors for a banana split?

C(10,3)=120
::::

# Finding the Number of Subsets of a Set {#fs-id1165137438950}

We have looked only at combination problems in which we chose exactly r
objects. In some problems, we want to consider choosing every possible
number of objects. Consider, for example, a pizza restaurant that offers
5 toppings. Any number of toppings can be ordered. How many different
pizzas are possible?

To answer this question, we need to consider pizzas with any number of
toppings. There is C(5,0)=1 way to order a pizza with no toppings. There
are C(5,1)=5 ways to order a pizza with exactly one topping. If we
continue this process, we get

$$C(5,0) + C(5,1) + C(5,2) + C(5,3) + C(5,4) + C(5,5) = 32$$

There are 32 possible pizzas. This result is equal to 2 5 .

We are presented with a sequence of choices. For each of the n objects
we have two choices: include it in the subset or not. So for the whole
subset we have made n choices, each with two options. So there are a
total of 2·2·2·...·2 possible resulting subsets, all the way from the
empty subset, which we obtain when we say "no" each time, to the
original set itself, which we obtain when we say "yes" each time.

:::: {#fs-id1165135252247 .note}
::: title
Formula for the Number of Subsets of a Set
:::

A set containing *n* distinct objects has 2 n subsets.
::::

::: {#Example_11_05_06 .example}
A restaurant offers butter, cheese, chives, and sour cream as toppings
for a baked potato. How many different ways are there to order a potato?

We are looking for the number of subsets of a set with 4 objects.
Substitute n=4 into the formula.

$$\begin{array}{l}
{2^{n} = 2^{4}} \\
{\mspace{9mu}\text{~~~} = 16}
\end{array}$$

There are 16 possible ways to order a potato.
:::

:::: {#fs-id1165137605248 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

A sundae bar at a wedding has 6 toppings to choose from. Any number of
toppings can be chosen. How many different sundaes are possible?

64 sundaes
::::

# Finding the Number of Permutations of *n* Non-Distinct Objects {#fs-id1165137472540}

We have studied permutations where all of the objects involved were
distinct. What happens if some of the objects are indistinguishable? For
example, suppose there is a sheet of 12 stickers. If all of the stickers
were distinct, there would be 12! ways to order the stickers. However, 4
of the stickers are identical stars, and 3 are identical moons. Because
all of the objects are not distinct, many of the 12! permutations we
counted are duplicates. The general formula for this situation is as
follows.

$$\frac{n!}{r_{1}!r_{2}!\ldots r_{k}!}$$

In this example, we need to divide by the number of ways to order the 4
stars and the ways to order the 3 moons to find the number of unique
permutations of the stickers. There are 4! ways to order the stars and
3! ways to order the moon.

$$\frac{12!}{4!3!} = 3\text{,}326\text{,}400$$

There are 3,326,400 ways to order the sheet of stickers.

:::: {#fs-id1165137442399 .note}
::: title
Formula for Finding the Number of Permutations of *n* Non-Distinct
Objects
:::

If there are n elements in a set and r 1 are alike, r 2 are alike, r 3
are alike, and so on through r k , the number of permutations can be
found by

$$\frac{n!}{r_{1}!r_{2}!\ldots r_{k}!}$$
::::

::: {#Example_11_05_07 .example}
Find the number of rearrangements of the letters in the word DISTINCT.

There are 8 letters. Both I and T are repeated 2 times. Substitute n=8, 
r 1 =2,  and   r 2 =2  into the formula.

$$\frac{8!}{2!2!} = 10\text{,}080~$$

There are 10,080 arrangements.
:::

:::: {#fs-id1165135160178 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Find the number of rearrangements of the letters in the word CARRIER.

840
::::

:::: {#fs-id1165137462566 .note}
::: title
:::

Media

Access these online resources for additional instruction and practice
with combinations and permutations.

Combinations

Permutations
::::

# Key Equations {#fs-id1165137898988}

  ---------------------------------------------------------------- -------------------------
  number of permutations of n distinct objects taken r at a time   P(n,r)= n! (n−r)!
  number of combinations of n distinct objects taken r at a time   C(n,r)= n! r!(n−r)!
  number of permutations of n non-distinct objects                 n! r 1 ! r 2 !... r k !
  ---------------------------------------------------------------- -------------------------

# Key Concepts {#fs-id1165137772409}

If one event can occur in

m

ways and a second event with no common outcomes can occur in

n

ways, then the first or second event can occur in

m

\+

n

ways. See

.

If one event can occur in

m

ways and a second event can occur in

n

ways after the first event has occurred, then the two events can occur
in

m

×

n

ways. See

.

A permutation is an ordering of

n

objects.

If we have a set of

n

objects and we want to choose

r

objects from the set in order, we write

P

(

n

,

r

)

.

Permutation problems can be solved using the Multiplication Principle or
the formula for

P

(

n

,

r

)

.

See

and

.

A selection of objects where the order does not matter is a combination.

Given

n

distinct objects, the number of ways to select

r

objects from the set is

C

(

n

,

r

)

and can be found using a formula. See

.

A set containing

n

distinct objects has

2

n

subsets. See

.

For counting problems involving non-distinct objects, we need to divide
to avoid counting duplicate permutations. See

.

# Section Exercises {#fs-id1165135638474}

## Verbal {#fs-id1165135638477}

For the following exercises, assume that there are n ways an event A can
happen, m ways an event B can happen, and that Aand B are
non-overlapping.

Use the Addition Principle of counting to explain how many ways event
Aor B can occur.

There are m+n ways for either event A or event B to occur.

Use the Multiplication Principle of counting to explain how many ways
event Aand B can occur.

Answer the following questions.

When given two separate events, how do we know whether to apply the
Addition Principle or the Multiplication Principle when calculating
possible outcomes? What conjunctions may help to determine which
operations to use?

The addition principle is applied when determining the total possible of
outcomes of either event occurring. The multiplication principle is
applied when determining the total possible outcomes of both events
occurring. The word "or" usually implies an addition problem. The word
"and" usually implies a multiplication problem.

Describe how the permutation of n objects differs from the permutation
of choosing r objects from a set of n objects. Include how each is
calculated.

What is the term for the arrangement that selects r objects from a set
of n objects when the order of the r objects is not important? What is
the formula for calculating the number of possible outcomes for this
type of arrangement?

A combination; C(n,r)= n! (n−r)!r!

## Numeric {#fs-id1165137646270}

For the following exercises, determine whether to use the Addition
Principle or the Multiplication Principle. Then perform the
calculations.

Let the set A={−5,−3,−1,2,3,4,5,6}. How many ways are there to choose a
negative or an even number from A?

Let the set B={−23,−16,−7,−2,20,36,48,72}. How many ways are there to
choose a positive or an odd number from A?

4+2=6

How many ways are there to pick a red ace or a club from a standard card
playing deck?

How many ways are there to pick a paint color from 5 shades of green, 4
shades of blue, or 7 shades of yellow?

5+4+7=16

How many outcomes are possible from tossing a pair of coins?

How many outcomes are possible from tossing a coin and rolling a 6-sided
die?

2×6=12

How many two-letter strings---the first letter from A and the second
letter from B--- can be formed from the sets A={b,c,d} and
B={a,e,i,o,u}?

How many ways are there to construct a string of 3 digits if numbers can
be repeated?

10 3 =1000

How many ways are there to construct a string of 3 digits if numbers
cannot be repeated?

For the following exercises, compute the value of the expression.

P(5,2)

P(5,2)=20

P(8,4)

P(3,3)

P(3,3)=6

P(9,6)

P(11,5)

P(11,5)=55,440

C(8,5)

C(12,4)

C(12,4)=495

C(26,3)

C(7,6)

C(7,6)=7

C(10,3)

For the following exercises, find the number of subsets in each given
set.

{1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9,10}

2 10 =1024

{a,b,c,...,z}

A set containing 5 distinct numbers, 4 distinct letters, and 3 distinct
symbols

2 12 =4096

The set of even numbers from 2 to 28

The set of two-digit numbers between 1 and 100 containing the digit 0

2 9 =512

For the following exercises, find the distinct number of arrangements.

The letters in the word "juggernaut"

The letters in the word "academia"

8! 3! =6720

The letters in the word "academia" that begin and end in "a"

The symbols in the string #,#,#,@,@,\$,\$,\$,%,%,%,%

12! 3!2!3!4!

The symbols in the string #,#,#,@,@,\$,\$,\$,%,%,%,% that begin and end
with "%"

## Extensions {#fs-id1165137832402}

The set, S consists of 900,000,000 whole numbers, each being the same
number of digits long. How many digits long is a number from S? (*Hint:*
use the fact that a whole number cannot start with the digit 0.)

9

The number of 5-element subsets from a set containing n elements is
equal to the number of 6-element subsets from the same set. What is the
value of n? (*Hint:* the order in which the elements for the subsets are
chosen is not important.)

Can C(n,r) ever equal P(n,r)? Explain.

Yes, for the trivial cases r=0 and r=1. If r=0, then C(n,r)=P(n,r)=1. 
If r=1, then r=1, C(n,r)=P(n,r)=n.

Suppose a set A has 2,048 subsets. How many distinct objects are
contained in A?

How many arrangements can be made from the letters of the word
"mountains" if all the vowels must form a string?

6! 2! ×4!=8640

## Real-World Applications {#fs-id1165135526953}

A family consisting of 2 parents and 3 children is to pose for a picture
with 2 family members in the front and 3 in the back.

ⓐ

How many arrangements are possible with no restrictions?

ⓑ

How many arrangements are possible if the parents must sit in the front?

ⓒ

How many arrangements are possible if the parents must be next to each
other?

A cell phone company offers 6 different voice packages and 8 different
data packages. Of those, 3 packages include both voice and data. How
many ways are there to choose either voice or data, but not both?

6−3+8−3=8

In horse racing, a "trifecta" occurs when a bettor wins by selecting the
first three finishers in the exact order (1st place, 2nd place, and 3rd
place). How many different trifectas are possible if there are 14 horses
in a race?

A wholesale T-shirt company offers sizes small, medium, large, and
extra-large in organic or non-organic cotton and colors white, black,
gray, blue, and red. How many different T-shirts are there to choose
from?

4×2×5=40

Hector wants to place billboard advertisements throughout the county for
his new business. How many ways can Hector choose 15 neighborhoods to
advertise in if there are 30 neighborhoods in the county?

An art store has 4 brands of paint pens in 12 different colors and 3
types of ink. How many paint pens are there to choose from?

4×12×3=144

How many ways can a committee of 3 freshmen and 4 juniors be formed from
a group of 8 freshmen and 11 juniors?

How many ways can a baseball coach arrange the order of 9 batters if
there are 15 players on the team?

P(15,9)=1,816,214,400

A conductor needs 5 cellists and 5 violinists to play at a diplomatic
event. To do this, he ranks the orchestra's 10 cellists and 16
violinists in order of musical proficiency. What is the ratio of the
total cellist rankings possible to the total violinist rankings
possible?

A motorcycle shop has 10 choppers, 6 bobbers, and 5 café
racers---different types of vintage motorcycles. How many ways can the
shop choose 3 choppers, 5 bobbers, and 2 café racers for a weekend
showcase?

C(10,3)×C(6,5)×C(5,2)=7,200

A skateboard shop stocks 10 types of board decks, 3 types of trucks, and
4 types of wheels. How many different skateboards can be constructed?

Just-For-Kicks Sneaker Company offers an online customizing service. How
many ways are there to design a custom pair of Just-For-Kicks sneakers
if a customer can choose from a basic shoe up to 11 customizable
options?

2 11 =2048

A car wash offers the following optional services to the basic wash:
clear coat wax, triple foam polish, undercarriage wash, rust inhibitor,
wheel brightener, air freshener, and interior shampoo. How many washes
are possible if any number of options can be added to the basic wash?

Suni bought 20 plants to arrange along the border of her garden. How
many distinct arrangements can she make if the plants are comprised of 6
tulips, 6 roses, and 8 daisies?

20! 6!6!8! =116,396,280

How many unique ways can a string of Christmas lights be arranged from 9
red, 10 green, 6 white, and 12 gold color bulbs?

# 

Addition Principle

if one event can occur in

m

ways and a second event with no common outcomes can occur in

n

ways, then the first or second event can occur in

m

\+

n

ways

combination

a selection of objects in which order does not matter

Fundamental Counting Principle

if one event can occur in

m

ways and a second event can occur in

n

ways after the first event has occurred, then the two events can occur
in

m

×

n

ways; also known as the Multiplication Principle

Multiplication Principle

if one event can occur in

m

ways and a second event can occur in

n

ways after the first event has occurred, then the two events can occur
in

m

×

n

ways; also known as the Fundamental Counting Principle

permutation

a selection of objects in which order matters
