m49449

> In this section, you will:
>
> Apply the Binomial Theorem.

05ece6ed-b387-41cc-b8bc-742abaaf814f

#  {#eip-113}

## Learning Objectives {#eip-85}

Use Pascal's Triangle to expand a binomial. (IA 12.4.1)

## Objective 1: Use Pascal's Triangle to expand a binomial. (IA 12.4.1) {#eip-688}

Pascal's triangle helps us find the coefficients of the terms in the
expansion of a binomial.

To find the coefficients of the terms, we write our expansion again
focusing on the coefficients. We rewrite the coefficients to the right
forming an array of coefficients. The array to the right is called
Pascal's Triangle.

Notice that in each expansion the powers of *a* in each term decrease
from *n* to 0, and the powers of *b* increase from 0 to *n*.

Notice each number in the array is the sum of the two closest numbers in
the row above. We can find the next row by starting and ending with one
and then adding two adjacent numbers.

To find the coefficients of the expansion of the binomial (a+b)n , go to
the row that has the value n as a second entry.

::: {#eip-35 .example}
Use Pascal's Triangle to expand (x+y)6 .

  ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- --
  Go to Pascal's Triangle and read off the coefficients from the row whose second entry is 6.                   
  Write the expansion with the coefficients.                                                                    
  Fill in the variable with the power of x decreasing from 6 to 0, and the power of y increasing from 0 to 6.   
  Binomial expansion of (x+y)6 .                                                                                
  ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- --
:::

::: {#eip-731 .example}
Use Pascal's Triangle to expand (x+3)5 .

  ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- --
  Go to Pascal's Triangle and read off the coefficients from the row whose second entry is 5.                   
  Write the expansion with the coefficients.                                                                    
  Fill in the variable with the power of x decreasing from 5 to 0, and the power of 3 increasing from 0 to 5.   
  Binomial expansion of (x+3)5 .                                                                                
  ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- --
:::

::: {#eip-256 .example}
Use Pascal's Triangle to expand (3x-2)4 .

  ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- --
  Go to Pascal's Triangle and read off the coefficients from the row whose second entry is 4.                         
  Write the expansion with the coefficients.                                                                          
  Fill in the variable with the power of (3x) decreasing from 4 to 0, and the power of (-2) increasing from 0 to 4.   
  Binomial expansion of (3x-2)4 .                                                                                     
  ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- --
:::

### Practice Makes Perfect {#eip-184}

Use Pascal's Triangle to expand a binomial.

Use Pascal's Triangle to expand (a+b)4 .

Use Pascal's Triangle to expand (y+3)5 .

Use Pascal's Triangle to expand (2x-5)3 .

A polynomial with two terms is called a binomial. We have already
learned to multiply binomials and to raise binomials to powers, but
raising a binomial to a high power can be tedious and time-consuming. In
this section, we will discuss a shortcut that will allow us to find
(x+y) n without multiplying the binomial by itself n times.

# Identifying Binomial Coefficients {#fs-id1165135195368}

In [Counting Principles](#), we studied combinations. In the shortcut to
finding (x+y) n , we will need to use combinations to find the
coefficients that will appear in the expansion of the binomial. In this
case, we use the notation ( n r ) instead of C(n,r), but it can be
calculated in the same way. So$$\begin{pmatrix}
n \\
r
\end{pmatrix} = C(n,r) = \frac{n!}{r!(n - r)!}$$

The combination ( n r ) is called a *binomial coefficient*. An example
of a binomial coefficient is ( 5 2 )=C(5,2)=10.

:::: {#fs-id1165137482950 .note}
::: title
Binomial Coefficients
:::

If n and r are integers greater than or equal to 0 with n≥r, then the
binomial coefficient is

$$\begin{pmatrix}
n \\
r
\end{pmatrix} = C(n,r) = \frac{n!}{r!(n - r)!}$$
::::

:::: {#fs-id1165135174912 .note}
::: title
:::

Q&A

*Is a binomial coefficient always a whole number?*

*Yes. Just as the number of combinations must always be a whole number,
a binomial coefficient will always be a whole number.*
::::

::: {#Example_11_06_01 .example}
Find each binomial coefficient.

ⓐ

(

5

3

)

ⓑ

(

9

2

)

ⓒ

(

9

7

)

Use the formula to calculate each binomial coefficient. You can also use
the n C r function on your calculator.

$$\begin{pmatrix}
n \\
r
\end{pmatrix} = C(n,r) = \frac{n!}{r!(n - r)!}$$

ⓐ

(

5

3

)

=

5

!

3

!

(

5

−

3

)

!

=

5

⋅

4

⋅

3

!

3

!

2

!

=

10

ⓑ

(

9

2

)

=

9

!

2

!

(

9

−

2

)

!

=

9

⋅

8

⋅

7

!

2

!

7

!

=

36

ⓒ

(

9

7

)

=

9

!

7

!

(

9

−

7

)

!

=

9

⋅

8

⋅

7

!

7

!

2

!

=

36

Notice that we obtained the same result for parts (b) and (c). If you
look closely at the solution for these two parts, you will see that you
end up with the same two factorials in the denominator, but the order is
reversed, just as with combinations.$$\begin{pmatrix}
n \\
r
\end{pmatrix} = \begin{pmatrix}
n \\
{n - r}
\end{pmatrix}$$
:::

:::: {#fs-id1165135309824 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Find each binomial coefficient.

ⓐ ( 7 3 ) ⓑ ( 11 4 )

ⓐ35 ⓑ330
::::

# Using the Binomial Theorem {#fs-id1165137722450}

When we expand (x+y) n by multiplying, the result is called a binomial
expansion, and it includes binomial coefficients. If we wanted to expand
(x+y) 52 , we might multiply (x+y) by itself fifty-two times. This could
take hours! If we examine some simple binomial expansions, we can find
patterns that will lead us to a shortcut for finding more complicated
binomial expansions.

$$\begin{array}{l}
{{(x + y)}^{2} = x^{2} + 2xy + y^{2}} \\
{{(x + y)}^{3} = x^{3} + 3x^{2}y + 3xy^{2} + y^{3}} \\
{{(x + y)}^{4} = x^{4} + 4x^{3}y + 6x^{2}y^{2} + 4xy^{3} + y^{4}}
\end{array}$$

First, let's examine the exponents. With each successive term, the
exponent for x decreases and the exponent for y increases. The sum of
the two exponents is n for each term.

Next, let's examine the coefficients. Notice that the coefficients
increase and then decrease in a symmetrical pattern. The coefficients
follow a pattern:

$$\begin{pmatrix}
n \\
0
\end{pmatrix},\begin{pmatrix}
n \\
1
\end{pmatrix},\begin{pmatrix}
n \\
2
\end{pmatrix},...,\begin{pmatrix}
n \\
n
\end{pmatrix}.$$

These patterns lead us to the *Binomial Theorem*, which can be used to
expand any binomial.

$$\begin{array}{ll}
{(x + y)}^{n} & {= {\sum\limits_{k = 0}^{n}{\left( \begin{array}{l}
n \\
k
\end{array} \right)x^{n - k}}}y^{k}} \\
 & {= x^{n} + \left( \begin{array}{l}
n \\
1
\end{array} \right)x^{n - 1}y + \left( \begin{array}{l}
n \\
2
\end{array} \right)x^{n - 2}y^{2} + ... + \left( \begin{array}{l}
n \\
{n - 1}
\end{array} \right)xy^{n - 1} + y^{n}}
\end{array}$$

Another way to see the coefficients is to examine the expansion of a
binomial in general form, x+y, to successive powers 1, 2, 3, and 4.

$$\begin{array}{l}
{{(x + y)}^{1} = x + y} \\
{{(x + y)}^{2} = x^{2} + 2xy + y^{2}} \\
{{(x + y)}^{3} = x^{3} + 3x^{2}y + 3xy^{2} + y^{3}} \\
{{(x + y)}^{4} = x^{4} + 4x^{3}y + 6x^{2}y^{2} + 4xy^{3} + y^{4}}
\end{array}$$

Can you guess the next expansion for the binomial (x+y) 5 ?

<figure id="CNX_Precalc_Figure_11_06_002">

</figure>

See [\#](#), which illustrates the following:

There are

n

\+

1

terms in the expansion of

(

x

\+

y

)

n

.

The degree (or sum of the exponents) for each term is

n

.

The powers on

x

begin with

n

and decrease to 0.

The powers on

y

begin with 0 and increase to

n

.

The coefficients are symmetric.

To determine the expansion on (x+y) 5 , we see n=5, thus, there will be
5+1 = 6 terms. Each term has a combined degree of 5. In descending order
for powers of x, the pattern is as follows:

Introduce

x

5

,

and then for each successive term reduce the exponent on

x

by 1 until

x

0

=

1

is reached.

Introduce

y

0

=

1

,

and then increase the exponent on

y

by 1 until

y

5

is reached.

$$x^{5},\mspace{9mu}\mspace{9mu} x^{4}y,\mspace{9mu}\mspace{9mu} x^{3}y^{2},\mspace{9mu}\mspace{9mu} x^{2}y^{3},\mspace{9mu}\mspace{9mu} xy^{4},\mspace{9mu}\mspace{9mu} y^{5}$$

The next expansion would be

$${(x + y)}^{5} = x^{5} + 5x^{4}y + 10x^{3}y^{2} + 10x^{2}y^{3} + 5xy^{4} + y^{5}.$$

But where do those coefficients come from? The binomial coefficients are
symmetric. We can see these coefficients in an array known as Pascal\'s
Triangle, shown in [\#](#). Pascal didn\'t invent the triangle. The
underlying principles had been developed and written about for over 1500
years, first by the Indian mathematician (and poet) Pingala in the
second century BCE. Others throughout Asia and Europe worked with the
concepts throughout, and the triangle was first published in its
graphical form by Omar Khayyam, an Iranian mathematician and astronomer,
for whom the triangle is named in Iran. French mathematician Blaise
Pascal repopularized it when he republished it and used it to solve a
number of probability problems.

<figure id="CNX_Precalc_Figure_11_06_001">

</figure>

To generate Pascal's Triangle, we start by writing a 1. In the row
below, row 2, we write two 1's. In the 3rd row, flank the ends of the
rows with 1's, and add 1+1 to find the middle number, 2. In the nth row,
flank the ends of the row with 1's. Each element in the triangle is the
sum of the two elements immediately above it.

To see the connection between Pascal's Triangle and binomial
coefficients, let us revisit the expansion of the binomials in general
form.

:::: {#fs-id1165135187302 .note}
::: title
The Binomial Theorem
:::

The Binomial Theorem is a formula that can be used to expand any
binomial.

$$\begin{array}{ll}
{(x + y)}^{n} & {= {\sum\limits_{k = 0}^{n}{\left( \begin{array}{l}
n \\
k
\end{array} \right)x^{n - k}y^{k}}}} \\
 & {= x^{n} + \left( \begin{array}{l}
n \\
1
\end{array} \right)x^{n - 1}y + \left( \begin{array}{l}
n \\
2
\end{array} \right)x^{n - 2}y^{2} + ... + \left( \begin{array}{l}
n \\
{n - 1}
\end{array} \right)xy^{n - 1} + y^{n}}
\end{array}$$
::::

:::: {#fs-id1165135646154 .note}
::: title
:::

How To

*Given a binomial, write it in expanded form.*

Determine the value of

n

according to the exponent.

Evaluate the

k

=

0

through

k

=

n

using the Binomial Theorem formula.

Simplify.
::::

::: {#Example_11_06_02 .example}
Write in expanded form.

ⓐ

(

x

\+

y

)

5

ⓑ

(

3

x

−

y

)

4

ⓐ

Substitute

n

=

5

into the formula. Evaluate the

k

=

0

through

k

=

5

terms. Simplify.

$$\begin{array}{ll}
{(x + y)}^{5} & {= \left( \begin{array}{l}
5 \\
0
\end{array} \right)x^{5}y^{0} + \left( \begin{array}{l}
5 \\
1
\end{array} \right)x^{4}y^{1} + \left( \begin{array}{l}
5 \\
2
\end{array} \right)x^{3}y^{2} + \left( \begin{array}{l}
5 \\
3
\end{array} \right)x^{2}y^{3} + \left( \begin{array}{l}
5 \\
4
\end{array} \right)x^{1}y^{4} + \left( \begin{array}{l}
5 \\
5
\end{array} \right)x^{0}y^{5}} \\
{(x + y)}^{5} & {= x^{5} + 5x^{4}y + 10x^{3}y^{2} + 10x^{2}y^{3} + 5xy^{4} + y^{5}}
\end{array}$$

ⓑ

Substitute

n

=

4

into the formula. Evaluate the

k

=

0

through

k

=

4

terms. Notice that

3

x

is in the place that was occupied by

x

and that

--

y

is in the place that was occupied by

y

.

So we substitute them. Simplify.

$$\begin{array}{ll}
{(3x - y)}^{4} & {= \left( \begin{array}{l}
4 \\
0
\end{array} \right){(3x)}^{4}{( - y)}^{0} + \left( \begin{array}{l}
4 \\
1
\end{array} \right){(3x)}^{3}{( - y)}^{1} + \left( \begin{array}{l}
4 \\
2
\end{array} \right){(3x)}^{2}{( - y)}^{2} + \left( \begin{array}{l}
4 \\
3
\end{array} \right){(3x)}^{1}{( - y)}^{3} + \left( \begin{array}{l}
4 \\
4
\end{array} \right){(3x)}^{0}{( - y)}^{4}} \\
{(3x - y)}^{4} & {= 81x^{4} - 108x^{3}y + 54x^{2}y^{2} - 12xy^{3} + y^{4}}
\end{array}$$

Notice the alternating signs in part b. This happens because (−y) raised
to odd powers is negative, but (−y) raised to even powers is positive.
This will occur whenever the binomial contains a subtraction sign.
:::

:::: {#fs-id1165135501144 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Write in expanded form.

ⓐ

(

x

−

y

)

5

ⓑ

(

2

x

\+

5

y

)

3

ⓐ

x

5

−

5

x

4

y

\+

10

x

3

y

2

−

10

x

2

y

3

\+

5

x

y

4

−

y

5

ⓑ

8

x

3

\+

60

x

2

y

\+

150

x

y

2

\+

125

y

3
::::

# Using the Binomial Theorem to Find a Single Term {#fs-id1165137658053}

Expanding a binomial with a high exponent such as (x+2y) 16 can be a
lengthy process.

Sometimes we are interested only in a certain term of a binomial
expansion. We do not need to fully expand a binomial to find a single
specific term.

Note the pattern of coefficients in the expansion of (x+y) 5 .

$${(x + y)}^{5} = x^{5} + \begin{pmatrix}
5 \\
1
\end{pmatrix}x^{4}y + \begin{pmatrix}
5 \\
2
\end{pmatrix}x^{3}y^{2} + \begin{pmatrix}
5 \\
3
\end{pmatrix}x^{2}y^{3} + \begin{pmatrix}
5 \\
4
\end{pmatrix}xy^{4} + y^{5}$$

The second term is ( 5 1 ) x 4 y. The third term is ( 5 2 ) x 3 y 2 . We
can generalize this result.

$$\begin{pmatrix}
n \\
r
\end{pmatrix}x^{n - r}y^{r}$$

:::: {#fs-id1165137466315 .note}
::: title
The (r+1)th Term of a Binomial Expansion
:::

The (r+1)th term of the binomial expansion of (x+y) n is:

$$\begin{pmatrix}
n \\
r
\end{pmatrix}x^{n - r}y^{r}$$
::::

:::: {#fs-id1165137400324 .note}
::: title
:::

How To

*Given a binomial, write a specific term without fully expanding.*

Determine the value of

n

according to the exponent.

Determine

(

r

\+

1

)

.

Determine

r

.

Replace

r

in the formula for the

(

r

\+

1

)

th

term of the binomial expansion.
::::

::: {#Example_11_06_03 .example}
Find the tenth term of (x+2y) 16 without fully expanding the binomial.

Because we are looking for the tenth term, r+1=10, we will use r=9 in
our calculations.

$$\begin{pmatrix}
n \\
r
\end{pmatrix}x^{n - r}y^{r}$$

$$\begin{pmatrix}
16 \\
9
\end{pmatrix}x^{16 - 9}{(2y)}^{9} = 5\text{,}857\text{,}280x^{7}y^{9}$$
:::

:::: {#fs-id1165137732277 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Find the sixth term of (3x−y) 9 without fully expanding the binomial.

−10,206 x 4 y 5
::::

:::: {#fs-id1165137862398 .note}
::: title
:::

Media

Access these online resources for additional instruction and practice
with binomial expansion.

The Binomial Theorem

Binomial Theorem Example
::::

# Key Equations {#fs-id1165135705092}

  -------------------------------------- -------------------------------------
  Binomial Theorem                       (x+y) n = ∑ k−0 n ( n k ) x n−k y k
  (r+1)th term of a binomial expansion   ( n r ) x n−r y r
  -------------------------------------- -------------------------------------

# Key Concepts {#fs-id1165137469809}

(

n

r

)

is called a binomial coefficient and is equal to

C

(

n

,

r

)

.

See

.

The Binomial Theorem allows us to expand binomials without multiplying.
See

.

We can find a given term of a binomial expansion without fully expanding
the binomial. See

.

# Section Exercises {#fs-id1165134089502}

## Verbal {#fs-id1165134089506}

What is a binomial coefficient, and how it is calculated?

A binomial coefficient is an alternative way of denoting the combination
C(n,r). It is defined as ( n r )=C(n,r)= n! r!(n−r)! .

What role do binomial coefficients play in a binomial expansion? Are
they restricted to any type of number?

What is the Binomial Theorem and what is its use?

The Binomial Theorem is defined as (x+y) n = ∑ k=0 n ( n k ) x n−k y k
and can be used to expand any binomial.

When is it an advantage to use the Binomial Theorem? Explain.

## Algebraic {#fs-id1165137408889}

For the following exercises, evaluate the binomial coefficient.

( 6 2 )

15

( 5 3 )

( 7 4 )

35

( 9 7 )

( 10 9 )

10

( 25 11 )

( 17 6 )

12,376

( 200 199 )

For the following exercises, use the Binomial Theorem to expand each
binomial.

(4a−b) 3

64 a 3 −48 a 2 b+12a b 2 − b 3

(5a+2) 3

(3a+2b) 3

27 a 3 +54 a 2 b+36a b 2 +8 b 3

(2x+3y) 4

(4x+2y) 5

1024 x 5 +2560 x 4 y+2560 x 3 y 2 +1280 x 2 y 3 +320x y 4 +32 y 5

(3x−2y) 4

(4x−3y) 5

1024 x 5 −3840 x 4 y+5760 x 3 y 2 −4320 x 2 y 3 +1620x y 4 −243 y 5

( 1 x +3y ) 5

( x −1 +2 y −1 ) 4

1 x 4 + 8 x 3 y + 24 x 2 y 2 + 32 x y 3 + 16 y 4

( x − y ) 5

For the following exercises, use the Binomial Theorem to write the first
three terms of each binomial.

(a+b) 17

a 17 +17 a 16 b+136 a 15 b 2

(x−1) 18

(a−2b) 15

a 15 −30 a 14 b+420 a 13 b 2

(x−2y) 8

(3a+b) 20

3,486,784,401 a 20 +23,245,229,340 a 19 b+73,609,892,910 a 18 b 2

(2a+4b) 7

( x 3 − y ) 8

x 24 −8 x 21 y +28 x 18 y

For the following exercises, find the indicated term of each binomial
without fully expanding the binomial.

The fourth term of (2x−3y) 4

The fourth term of (3x−2y) 5

−720 x 2 y 3

The third term of (6x−3y) 7

The eighth term of (7+5y) 14

220,812,466,875,000 y 7

The seventh term of (a+b) 11

The fifth term of (x−y) 7

35 x 3 y 4

The tenth term of (x−1) 12

The ninth term of (a−3 b 2 ) 11

1,082,565 a 3 b 16

The fourth term of ( x 3 − 1 2 ) 10

The eighth term of ( y 2 + 2 x ) 9

1152 y 2 x 7

## Graphical {#fs-id1165137653220}

For the following exercises, use the Binomial Theorem to expand the
binomial f(x)= (x+3) 4 . Then find and graph each indicated sum on one
set of axes.

Find and graph f 1 (x), such that f 1 (x) is the first term of the
expansion.

Find and graph f 2 (x), such that f 2 (x) is the sum of the first two
terms of the expansion.

f 2 (x)= x 4 +12 x 3

Find and graph f 3 (x), such that f 3 (x) is the sum of the first three
terms of the expansion.

Find and graph f 4 (x), such that f 4 (x) is the sum of the first four
terms of the expansion.

f 4 (x)= x 4 +12 x 3 +54 x 2 +108x

Find and graph f 5 (x), such that f 5 (x) is the sum of the first five
terms of the expansion.

## Extensions {#fs-id1165137836668}

In the expansion of (5x+3y) n , each term has the form ( n k ) a n--k b
k , where k successively takes on the value 0,1,2,\...,n. If ( n k )=( 7
2 ), what is the corresponding term?

590,625 x 5 y 2

In the expansion of ( a+b ) n , the coefficient of a n−k b k is the same
as the coefficient of which other term?

Consider the expansion of (x+b) 40 . What is the exponent of b in the
kth term?

k−1

Find ( n k−1 )+( n k ) and write the answer as a binomial coefficient in
the form ( n k ). Prove it. *Hint:* Use the fact that, for any integer
p, such that p≥1,p!=p(p−1)!.

Which expression cannot be expanded using the Binomial Theorem? Explain.

(

x

2

−

2

x

\+

1

)

(

a

\+

4

a

−

5

)

8

(

x

3

\+

2

y

2

−

z

)

5

(

3

x

2

−

2

y

3

)

12

The expression ( x 3 +2 y 2 −z) 5 cannot be expanded using the Binomial
Theorem because it cannot be rewritten as a binomial.

# 

binomial coefficient

the number of ways to choose

r

objects from

n

objects where order does not matter; equivalent to

C

(

n

,

r

)

,

denoted

(

n

r

)

binomial expansion

the result of expanding

(

x

\+

y

)

n

by multiplying

Binomial Theorem

a formula that can be used to expand any binomial
