m51283

> In this section you will:
>
> Draw angles in standard position.
>
> Convert between degrees and radians.
>
> Find coterminal angles.
>
> Find the length of a circular arc.
>
> Use linear and angular speed to describe motion on a circular path.

dfea3cab-f983-481e-a2f0-dc2a5bbdb32d

A golfer swings to hit a ball over a sand trap and onto the green. An
airline pilot maneuvers a plane toward a narrow runway. A dress designer
creates the latest fashion. What do they all have in common? They all
work with angles, and so do all of us at one time or another. Sometimes
we need to measure angles exactly with instruments. Other times we
estimate them or judge them by eye. Either way, the proper angle can
make the difference between success and failure in many undertakings. In
this section, we will examine properties of angles.

# Drawing Angles in Standard Position {#fs-id1109912}

Properly defining an angle first requires that we define a ray. A ray is
a directed line segment. It consists of one point on a line and all
points extending in one direction from that point. The first point is
called the endpoint of the ray. We can refer to a specific ray by
stating its endpoint and any other point on it. The ray in [\#](#) can
be named as ray EF, or in symbol form EF ⟶ .

<figure id="Figure_07_01_001">

</figure>

An angle is the union of two rays having a common endpoint. The endpoint
is called the vertex of the angle, and the two rays are the sides of the
angle. The angle in [\#](#) is formed from ED ⟶ and EF ⟶ . Angles can be
named using a point on each ray and the vertex, such as angle *DEF*, or
in symbol form ∠DEF.

<figure id="Figure_07_01_002">

</figure>

Greek letters are often used as variables for the measure of an angle.
[\#](#) is a list of Greek letters commonly used to represent angles,
and a sample angle is shown in [\#](#).

  θ       φ or ϕ   α       β      γ
  ------- -------- ------- ------ -------
  theta   phi      alpha   beta   gamma

<figure id="Figure_07_01_003">

</figure>

Angle creation is a dynamic process. We start with two rays lying on top
of one another. We leave one fixed in place, and rotate the other. The
fixed ray is the initial side*,* and the rotated ray is the terminal
side. In order to identify the different sides, we indicate the rotation
with a small arrow close to the vertex as in [\#](#).

<figure id="Figure_07_01_004">

</figure>

As we discussed at the beginning of the section, there are many
applications for angles, but in order to use them correctly, we must be
able to measure them. The measure of an angle is the amount of rotation
from the initial side to the terminal side. Probably the most familiar
unit of angle measurement is the degree. One degree is 1 360 of a
circular rotation, so a complete circular rotation contains 360 degrees.
An angle measured in degrees should always include the unit "degrees"
after the number, or include the degree symbol °. For example,
90degrees=90°.

To formalize our work, we will begin by drawing angles on an *x*-*y*
coordinate plane. Angles can occur in any position on the coordinate
plane, but for the purpose of comparison, the convention is to
illustrate them in the same position whenever possible. An angle is in
standard position if its vertex is located at the origin, and its
initial side extends along the positive *x*-axis. See [\#](#).

<figure id="Figure_07_01_005">

</figure>

If the angle is measured in a counterclockwise direction from the
initial side to the terminal side, the angle is said to be a positive
angle. If the angle is measured in a clockwise direction, the angle is
said to be a negative angle.

Drawing an angle in standard position always starts the same way---draw
the initial side along the positive *x*-axis. To place the terminal side
of the angle, we must calculate the fraction of a full rotation the
angle represents. We do that by dividing the angle measure in degrees by
360°. For example, to draw a 90° angle, we calculate that 90° 360° = 1 4
. So, the terminal side will be one-fourth of the way around the circle,
moving counterclockwise from the positive *x*-axis. To draw a 360°
angle, we calculate that 360° 360° =1. So the terminal side will be 1
complete rotation around the circle, moving counterclockwise from the
positive *x*-axis. In this case, the initial side and the terminal side
overlap. See [\#](#).

<figure id="Figure_07_01_006">

</figure>

Since we define an angle in standard position by its terminal side, we
have a special type of angle whose terminal side lies on an axis, a
*quadrantal angle*. This type of angle can have a measure of 0°, 90°,
180°, 270°, or 360°. See [\#](#).

<figure id="Figure_07_01_018">

</figure>

:::: {#fs-id1694069 .note}
::: title
Quadrantal Angles
:::

An angle is a quadrantal angle if its terminal side lies on an axis,
including 0°, 90°, 180°, 270°, or 360°.
::::

:::: {#fs-id2052296 .note}
::: title
:::

How To

*Given an angle measure in degrees, draw the angle in standard
position.*

Express the angle measure as a fraction of

360°

.

Reduce the fraction to simplest form.

Draw an angle that contains that same fraction of the circle, beginning
on the positive

x

-axis and moving counterclockwise for positive angles and clockwise for
negative angles.
::::

::: {#Example_07_01_01 .example}
ⓐ

Sketch an angle of

30°

in standard position.

ⓑ

Sketch an angle of

−135°

in standard position.

ⓐ

Divide the angle measure by 360°.

$$\frac{30{^\circ}}{360{^\circ}} = \frac{1}{12}$$

To rewrite the fraction in a more familiar fraction, we can recognize
that

$$\frac{1}{12} = \frac{1}{3}\left( \frac{1}{4} \right)$$

One-twelfth equals one-third of a quarter, so by dividing a quarter
rotation into thirds, we can sketch a line at 30°, as in [\#](#).

<figure id="Figure_07_01_007">

</figure>

ⓑ

Divide the angle measure by 360°.

$$\frac{-135{^\circ}}{360{^\circ}} = - \frac{3}{8}$$

In this case, we can recognize that

$$- \frac{3}{8} = - \frac{3}{2}\left( \frac{1}{4} \right)$$

Three-eighths is one and one-half times a quarter, so we place a line by
moving clockwise one full quarter and one-half of another quarter, as in
[\#](#).

<figure id="Figure_07_01_008">

</figure>
:::

:::: {#fs-id1710436 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Show an angle of 240° on a circle in standard position.
::::

# Converting Between Degrees and Radians {#fs-id1684444}

Dividing a circle into 360 parts is an arbitrary choice, although it
creates the familiar degree measurement. We may choose other ways to
divide a circle. To find another unit, think of the process of drawing a
circle. Imagine that you stop before the circle is completed. The
portion that you drew is referred to as an arc. An arc may be a portion
of a full circle, a full circle, or more than a full circle, represented
by more than one full rotation. The length of the arc around an entire
circle is called the circumference of that circle.

The circumference of a circle is C=2πr. If we divide both sides of this
equation by r, we create the ratio of the circumference, which is always
2π, to the radius, regardless of the length of the radius. So the
circumference of any circle is 2π≈6.28 times the length of the radius.
That means that if we took a string as long as the radius and used it to
measure consecutive lengths around the circumference, there would be
room for six full string-lengths and a little more than a quarter of a
seventh, as shown in [\#](#).

<figure id="Figure_07_01_010">

</figure>

This brings us to our new angle measure. One radian is the measure of a
central angle of a circle that intercepts an arc equal in length to the
radius of that circle. A central angle is an angle formed at the center
of a circle by two radii. Because the total circumference equals 2π
times the radius, a full circular rotation is 2π radians.

$$\begin{array}{rcl}
{2\pi\mspace{9mu}\text{radians}} & = & 360{^\circ} \\
{\pi\mspace{9mu}\text{radians}} & = & {\frac{360{^\circ}}{2} = 180{^\circ}} \\
{1\mspace{9mu}\text{radian}} & = & {\frac{180{^\circ}}{\pi} \approx 57.3{^\circ}}
\end{array}$$

See [\#](#). Note that when an angle is described without a specific
unit, it refers to radian measure. For example, an angle measure of 3
indicates 3 radians. In fact, radian measure is dimensionless, since it
is the quotient of a length (circumference) divided by a length (radius)
and the length units cancel.

<figure id="Figure_07_01_011">

</figure>

## Relating Arc Lengths to Radius {#fs-id1553463}

An arc length s is the length of the curve along the arc. Just as the
full circumference of a circle always has a constant ratio to the
radius, the arc length produced by any given angle also has a constant
relation to the radius, regardless of the length of the radius.

This ratio, called the radian measure, is the same regardless of the
radius of the circle---it depends only on the angle. This property
allows us to define a measure of any angle as the ratio of the arc
length s to the radius *r*. See [\#](#).

$$\begin{matrix}
s & = & {r\theta} \\
\theta & = & \frac{s}{r}
\end{matrix}$$

If s=r, then θ= r r =1 radian.

<figure id="Figure_07_01_013">

</figure>

To elaborate on this idea, consider two circles, one with radius 2 and
the other with radius 3. Recall the circumference of a circle is C=2πr,
where r is the radius. The smaller circle then has circumference
2π(2)=4π and the larger has circumference 2π(3)=6π. Now we draw a 45°
angle on the two circles, as in [\#](#).

<figure id="Figure_07_01_012">

</figure>

Notice what happens if we find the ratio of the arc length divided by
the radius of the circle.

$$\begin{matrix}
{\text{Smaller~circle:}\mspace{9mu}\frac{\frac{1}{2}\pi}{2}} & = & {\frac{1}{4}\pi} \\
{\text{Larger~circle:}\mspace{9mu}\frac{\frac{3}{4}\pi}{3}} & = & {\frac{1}{4}\pi}
\end{matrix}$$

Since both ratios are 1 4 π, the angle measures of both circles are the
same, even though the arc length and radius differ.

:::: {#fs-id1494641 .note}
::: title
Radians
:::

One radian is the measure of the central angle of a circle such that the
length of the arc between the initial side and the terminal side is
equal to the radius of the circle. A full revolution (360°) equals 2π
radians. A half revolution (180°) is equivalent to π radians.

The radian measure of an angle is the ratio of the length of the arc
subtended by the angle to the radius of the circle. In other words, if s
is the length of an arc of a circle, and r is the radius of the circle,
then the central angle containing that arc measures s r radians. In a
circle of radius 1, the radian measure corresponds to the length of the
arc.
::::

:::: {#fs-id1393122 .note}
::: title
:::

Q&A

*A measure of 1 radian looks to be about 60°. Is that correct?*

*Yes. It is approximately* 57.3°. *Because* 2π *radians equals* 360°,1
*radian equals* 360° 2π ≈57.3°.
::::

## Using Radians {#fs-id1588946}

Because radian measure is the ratio of two lengths, it is a unitless
measure. For example, in [\#](#), suppose the radius were 2 inches and
the distance along the arc were also 2 inches. When we calculate the
radian measure of the angle, the "inches" cancel, and we have a result
without units. Therefore, it is not necessary to write the label
"radians" after a radian measure, and if we see an angle that is not
labeled with "degrees" or the degree symbol, we can assume that it is a
radian measure.

Considering the most basic case, the unit circle (a circle with radius
1), we know that 1 rotation equals 360 degrees, 360°. We can also track
one rotation around a circle by finding the circumference, C=2πr, and
for the unit circle C=2π. These two different ways to rotate around a
circle give us a way to convert from degrees to radians.

$$\begin{array}{rclcl}
\text{1~rotation} & = & 360{^\circ} & = & {2\pi\mspace{9mu}\text{radians}} \\
{\frac{1}{2}\mspace{9mu}\text{rotation}} & = & 180{^\circ} & = & {\pi\mspace{9mu}\text{radians}} \\
{\frac{1}{4}\mspace{9mu}\text{rotation}} & = & 90{^\circ} & = & {\frac{\pi}{2}\mspace{9mu}\text{radians}}
\end{array}$$

## Identifying Special Angles Measured in Radians {#fs-id1420311}

In addition to knowing the measurements in degrees and radians of a
quarter revolution, a half revolution, and a full revolution, there are
other frequently encountered angles in one revolution of a circle with
which we should be familiar. It is common to encounter multiples of 30,
45, 60, and 90 degrees. These values are shown in [\#](#). Memorizing
these angles will be very useful as we study the properties associated
with angles.

<figure id="Figure_07_01_016">

</figure>

Now, we can list the corresponding radian values for the common measures
of a circle corresponding to those listed in [\#](#), which are shown in
[\#](#). Be sure you can verify each of these measures.

<figure id="Figure_07_01_017">

</figure>

::: {#Example_07_01_02 .example}
Find the radian measure of one-third of a full rotation.

For any circle, the arc length along such a rotation would be one-third
of the circumference. We know that

$$1\mspace{9mu}\text{rotation} = 2\pi r$$

So,

$$\begin{array}{ccl}
s & = & {\frac{1}{3}(2\pi r)} \\
 & = & \frac{2\pi r}{3}
\end{array}$$

The radian measure would be the arc length divided by the radius.

$$\begin{matrix}
\text{radian~measure} & = & \frac{\frac{2\pi r}{3}}{r} \\
 & = & \frac{2\pi r}{3r} \\
 & = & \frac{2\pi}{3}
\end{matrix}$$
:::

:::: {#fs-id2177688 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Find the radian measure of three-fourths of a full rotation.

3π 2
::::

## Converting Between Radians and Degrees {#fs-id2521380}

Because degrees and radians both measure angles, we need to be able to
convert between them. We can easily do so using a proportion where θ is
the measure of the angle in degrees and θ R is the measure of the angle
in radians.

$$\frac{\theta}{180} = \frac{\theta_{{}^{R}}}{\pi}$$

This proportion shows that the measure of angle θ in degrees divided by
180 equals the measure of angle θ in radians divided by π. Or, phrased
another way, degrees is to 180 as radians is to π.

$$\frac{\text{Degrees}}{180} = \frac{\text{Radians}}{\pi}$$

:::: {#fs-id2188473 .note}
::: title
Converting between Radians and Degrees
:::

To convert between degrees and radians, use the proportion

$$\frac{\theta}{180} = \frac{\theta_{R}}{\pi}$$
::::

::: {#Example_07_01_03 .example}
Convert each radian measure to degrees.

ⓐ

π

6

ⓑ

3

Because we are given radians and we want degrees, we should set up a
proportion and solve it.

ⓐ

We use the proportion, substituting the given information.

$$\begin{array}{rcl}
\frac{\theta}{180} & = & \frac{\theta_{R}}{\pi} \\
\frac{\theta}{180} & = & \frac{\frac{\pi}{6}}{\pi} \\
\theta & = & \frac{180}{6} \\
\theta & = & 30{^\circ}
\end{array}$$

ⓑ

We use the proportion, substituting the given information.

$$\begin{array}{rcl}
\frac{\theta}{180} & = & \frac{\theta_{{}^{R}}}{\pi} \\
\frac{\theta}{180} & = & \frac{3}{\pi} \\
\theta & = & \frac{3(180)}{\pi} \\
\theta & \approx & 172{^\circ}
\end{array}$$
:::

:::: {#fs-id1365528 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Convert − 3π 4 radians to degrees.

−135°
::::

::: {#Example_07_01_04 .example}
Convert 15 degrees to radians.

In this example, we start with degrees and want radians, so we again set
up a proportion, but we substitute the given information into a
different part of the proportion.

$$\begin{array}{rcl}
\frac{\theta}{180} & = & \frac{\theta_{R}}{\pi} \\
\frac{15}{180} & = & \frac{\theta_{R}}{\pi} \\
\frac{15\pi}{180} & = & \theta_{R} \\
\frac{\pi}{12} & = & \theta_{R}
\end{array}$$

Another way to think about this problem is by remembering that 30°= π 6
. Because 15°= 1 2 ( 30° ), we can find that 1 2 ( π 6 ) is π 12 .
:::

:::: {#fs-id2247554 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Convert 126° to radians.

7π 10
::::

# Finding Coterminal Angles {#fs-id1760757}

Converting between degrees and radians can make working with angles
easier in some applications. For other applications, we may need another
type of conversion. Negative angles and angles greater than a full
revolution are more awkward to work with than those in the range of 0°
to 360°, or 0 to 2π. It would be convenient to replace those
out-of-range angles with a corresponding angle within the range of a
single revolution.

It is possible for more than one angle to have the same terminal side.
Look at [\#](#). The angle of 140° is a positive angle, measured
counterclockwise. The angle of --220° is a negative angle, measured
clockwise. But both angles have the same terminal side. If two angles in
standard position have the same terminal side, they are coterminal
angles. Every angle greater than 360° or less than 0° is coterminal with
an angle between 0° and 360°, and it is often more convenient to find
the coterminal angle within the range of 0° to 360° than to work with an
angle that is outside that range.

<figure id="Figure_07_01_020">

</figure>

Any angle has infinitely many coterminal angles because each time we add
360° to that angle---or subtract 360° from it---the resulting value has
a terminal side in the same location. For example, 100° and 460° are
coterminal for this reason, as is −260°.

An angle's reference angle is the measure of the smallest, positive,
acute angle t ′ formed by the terminal side of the angle t and the
horizontal axis. Thus positive reference angles have terminal sides that
lie in the first quadrant and can be used as models for angles in other
quadrants. See [\#](#) for examples of reference angles for angles in
different quadrants.

<figure id="Figure_05_01_019">

</figure>

:::: {#fs-id1721055 .note}
::: title
Coterminal and Reference Angles
:::

*Coterminal angles* are two angles in standard position that have the
same terminal side.

An angle's reference angle is the size of the smallest acute angle, t ′
, formed by the terminal side of the angle t and the horizontal axis.
::::

:::: {#fs-id1571823 .note}
::: title
:::

How To

*Given an angle greater than 360°, find a coterminal angle between 0°
and 360°*

Subtract

360°

from the given angle.

If the result is still greater than

360°

,

subtract

360°

again till the result is between

0°

and

360°

.

The resulting angle is coterminal with the original angle.
::::

::: {#Example_07_01_05 .example}
Find the least positive angle θ that is coterminal with an angle
measuring 800°, where 0°≤θ\<360°.

An angle with measure 800° is coterminal with an angle with measure
800−360=440°, but 440° is still greater than 360°, so we subtract 360°
again to find another coterminal angle: 440−360=80°.

The angle θ=80° is coterminal with 800°. To put it another way, 800°
equals 80° plus two full rotations, as shown in [\#](#).

<figure id="Figure_07_01_021">

</figure>
:::

:::: {#fs-id1114649 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Find an angle α that is coterminal with an angle measuring 870°, where
0°≤α\<360°.

α=150°
::::

:::: {#fs-id1441287 .note}
::: title
:::

How To

*Given an angle with measure less than 0°, find a coterminal angle
having a measure between 0° and 360°.*

Add

360°

to the given angle.

If the result is still less than

0°

,

add

360°

again until the result is between

0°

and

360°

.

The resulting angle is coterminal with the original angle.
::::

::: {#Example_07_01_06 .example}
Show the angle with measure −45° on a circle and find a positive
coterminal angle α such that 0°≤α\<360°.

Since 45° is half of 90°, we can start at the positive horizontal axis
and measure clockwise half of a 90° angle.

Because we can find coterminal angles by adding or subtracting a full
rotation of 360°, we can find a positive coterminal angle here by adding
360°.

$$-45{^\circ} + 360{^\circ} = 315{^\circ}$$

We can then show the angle on a circle, as in [\#](#).

<figure id="Figure_07_01_022">

</figure>
:::

:::: {#fs-id1493458 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Find an angle β that is coterminal with an angle measuring −300° such
that 0°≤β\<360°.

β=60°
::::

## Finding Coterminal Angles Measured in Radians {#fs-id1427670}

We can find coterminal angles measured in radians in much the same way
as we have found them using degrees. In both cases, we find coterminal
angles by adding or subtracting one or more full rotations.

:::: {#fs-id1276587 .note}
::: title
:::

How To

*Given an angle greater than 2π, find a coterminal angle between 0 and
2π.*

Subtract

2

π

from the given angle.

If the result is still greater than

2

π

,

subtract

2

π

again until the result is between

0

and

2

π

.

The resulting angle is coterminal with the original angle.
::::

::: {#Example_07_01_07 .example}
Find an angle β that is coterminal with 19π 4 , where 0≤β\<2π.

When working in degrees, we found coterminal angles by adding or
subtracting 360 degrees, a full rotation. Likewise, in radians, we can
find coterminal angles by adding or subtracting full rotations of 2π
radians:

$$\begin{array}{ccl}
{\frac{19\pi}{4} - 2\pi} & = & {\frac{19\pi}{4} - \frac{8\pi}{4}} \\
 & = & \frac{11\pi}{4}
\end{array}$$

The angle 11π 4 is coterminal, but not less than 2π, so we subtract
another rotation.

$$\begin{array}{ccl}
{\frac{11\pi}{4} - 2\pi} & = & {\frac{11\pi}{4} - \frac{8\pi}{4}} \\
 & = & \frac{3\pi}{4}
\end{array}$$

The angle 3π 4 is coterminal with 19π 4 , as shown in [\#](#).

<figure id="Figure_07_01_023">

</figure>
:::

:::: {#fs-id1325836 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Find an angle of measure θ that is coterminal with an angle of measure −
17π 6 where 0≤θ\<2π.

7π 6
::::

# Determining the Length of an Arc {#fs-id2064000}

Recall that the radian measure θ of an angle was defined as the ratio of
the arc length s of a circular arc to the radius r of the circle, θ= s r
. From this relationship, we can find arc length along a circle, given
an angle.

:::: {#fs-id1618405 .note}
::: title
Arc Length on a Circle
:::

In a circle of radius *r*, the length of an arc s subtended by an angle
with measure θ in radians, shown in [\#](#), is

$$s = r\theta$$

<figure id="Figure_07_01_024">

</figure>
::::

:::: {#fs-id1574590 .note}
::: title
:::

How To

*Given a circle of radius r, calculate the length s of the arc subtended
by a given angle of measure θ.*

If necessary, convert

θ

to radians.

Multiply the radius

r

θ

:

s

=

r

θ

.
::::

::: {#Example_07_01_08 .example}
Assume the orbit of Mercury around the sun is a perfect circle. Mercury
is approximately 36 million miles from the sun.

ⓐ

In one Earth day, Mercury completes 0.0114 of its total revolution. How
many miles does it travel in one day?

ⓑ

Use your answer from part (a) to determine the radian measure for
Mercury's movement in one Earth day.

ⓐ

Let's begin by finding the circumference of Mercury's orbit.

$$\begin{array}{ccl}
C & = & {2\pi r} \\
 & = & {2\pi(\text{36 million~miles})} \\
 & \approx & \text{226~million~miles}
\end{array}$$

Since Mercury completes 0.0114 of its total revolution in one Earth day,
we can now find the distance traveled.

$$(0.0114)226\mspace{9mu}\text{million~miles~=~2}\text{.58~million~miles}$$

ⓑ

Now, we convert to radians.

$$\begin{array}{ccl}
\text{radian} & = & \frac{\text{arclength}}{\text{radius}} \\
 & = & \frac{2.\text{58~million~miles}}{36\mspace{9mu}\text{million~miles}} \\
 & = & 0.0717
\end{array}$$
:::

:::: {#fs-id1707239 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Find the arc length along a circle of radius 10 units subtended by an
angle of 215°.

215π 18 =37.525units
::::

# Finding the Area of a Sector of a Circle {#fs-id2606051}

In addition to arc length, we can also use angles to find the area of a
sector of a circle. A sector is a region of a circle bounded by two
radii and the intercepted arc, like a slice of pizza or pie. Recall that
the area of a circle with radius r can be found using the formula A=π r
2 . If the two radii form an angle of θ, measured in radians, then θ 2π
is the ratio of the angle measure to the measure of a full rotation and
is also, therefore, the ratio of the area of the sector to the area of
the circle. Thus, the *area of a sector* is the fraction θ 2π multiplied
by the entire area. (Always remember that this formula only applies if θ
is in radians.)

$$\begin{array}{ccl}
\text{Area~of~sector} & = & {\left( \frac{\theta}{2\pi} \right)\pi r^{2}} \\
 & = & \frac{\theta\pi r^{2}}{2\pi} \\
 & = & {\frac{1}{2}\theta r^{2}}
\end{array}$$

:::: {#fs-id2189251 .note}
::: title
Area of a Sector
:::

The area of a sector of a circle with radius r subtended by an angle θ,
measured in radians, is

$$A = \frac{1}{2}\theta r^{2}$$

See [\#](#).

<figure id="Figure_07_01_026">

</figure>
::::

:::: {#fs-id1799881 .note}
::: title
:::

How To

*Given a circle of radius r, find the area of a sector defined by a
given angle θ.*

If necessary, convert

θ

to radians.

Multiply half the radian measure of

θ

by the square of the radius

r

:

​

A

=

1

2

θ

r

2

.
::::

::: {#Example_07_01_09 .example}
An automatic lawn sprinkler sprays a distance of 20 feet while rotating
30 degrees, as shown in [\#](#). What is the area of the sector of grass
the sprinkler waters?

<figure id="Figure_07_01_027">

</figure>

First, we need to convert the angle measure into radians. Because 30
degrees is one of our special angles, we already know the equivalent
radian measure, but we can also convert:

$$\begin{array}{ccl}
{30\mspace{9mu}\text{degrees}} & = & {30 \cdot \frac{\pi}{180}} \\
 & = & {\frac{\pi}{6}\mspace{9mu}\text{radians}}
\end{array}$$

The area of the sector is then

$$\begin{array}{ccl}
\text{Area} & = & {\frac{1}{2}\left( \frac{\pi}{6} \right){(20)}^{2}} \\
 & \approx & 104.72
\end{array}$$

So the area is about 104.72 ft 2 .
:::

:::: {#fs-id2099700 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

In central pivot irrigation, which creates the field shapes similar to
the image at the beginning of [Equations and Inequalities](#), a large
irrigation pipe on wheels rotates around a center point. A farmer has a
central pivot system with a radius of 400 meters. If water restrictions
only allow her to water 150 thousand square meters a day, what angle
should she set the system to cover? Write the answer in radian measure
to two decimal places.

1.88
::::

# Use Linear and Angular Speed to Describe Motion on a Circular Path {#fs-id2099652}

In addition to finding the area of a sector, we can use angles to
describe the speed of a moving object. An object traveling in a circular
path has two types of speed. *Linear speed* is speed along a straight
path and can be determined by the distance it moves along (its
displacement) in a given time interval. For instance, if a wheel with
radius 5 inches rotates once a second, a point on the edge of the wheel
moves a distance equal to the circumference, or 10π inches, every
second. So the linear speed of the point is 10π in./s. The equation for
linear speed is as follows where v is linear speed, s is displacement,
and t is time.

$$v = \frac{s}{t}$$

Angular speed results from circular motion and can be determined by the
angle through which a point rotates in a given time interval. In other
words, angular speed is angular rotation per unit time. So, for
instance, if a gear makes a full rotation every 4 seconds, we can
calculate its angular speed as 360degrees 4seconds = 90 degrees per
second. Angular speed can be given in radians per second, rotations per
minute, or degrees per hour for example. The equation for angular speed
is as follows, where ω (read as omega) is angular speed, θ is the angle
traversed, and t is time.

$$\omega = \frac{\theta}{t}$$

Combining the definition of angular speed with the arc length equation,
s=rθ, we can find a relationship between angular and linear speeds. The
angular speed equation can be solved for θ, giving θ=ωt. Substituting
this into the arc length equation gives:

$$\begin{array}{ccl}
s & = & {r\theta} \\
 & = & {r\omega t}
\end{array}$$

Substituting this into the linear speed equation gives:

$$\begin{array}{ccl}
v & = & \frac{s}{t} \\
 & = & \frac{r\omega t}{t} \\
 & = & {r\omega}
\end{array}$$

:::: {#fs-id2054614 .note}
::: title
Angular and Linear Speed
:::

As a point moves along a circle of radius r, its angular speed, ω, is
the angular rotation θ per unit time, t.

$$\omega = \frac{\theta}{t}$$

The linear speed, v, of the point can be found as the distance traveled,
arc length s, per unit time, t.

$$v = \frac{s}{t}$$

When the angular speed is measured in radians per unit time, linear
speed and angular speed are related by the equation

$$v = r\omega$$

This equation states that the angular speed in radians, ω, representing
the amount of rotation occurring in a unit of time, can be multiplied by
the radius r to calculate the total arc length traveled in a unit of
time, which is the definition of linear speed.
::::

:::: {#fs-id2193928 .note}
::: title
:::

How To

*Given the amount of angle rotation and the time elapsed, calculate the
angular speed.*

If necessary, convert the angle measure to radians.

Divide the angle in radians by the number of time units elapsed:

ω

=

θ

t

.

The resulting speed will be in radians per time unit.
::::

Water wheels have been used for thousands of years to transfer the power
of flowing water to other devices. The image below depicts the design of
the the 3rd century Roman water wheel in Hierapolis, a city in what is
now Turkey. Water turned the wheel, which in turn rotated a crank
connected to two saws used to cut blocks. These design elements were
used in water wheel applications throughout the world, and even provided
the underlying principle for the steam engine, invented about 1500 years
later.

::: {#Example_07_01_10 .example}
A water wheel, shown in [\#](#), completes 1 rotation every 5 seconds.
Find the angular speed in radians per second.

<figure id="Figure_07_01_028">

</figure>

The wheel completes 1 rotation, or passes through an angle of 2π radians
in 5 seconds, so the angular speed would be ω= 2π 5 ≈1.257 radians per
second.
:::

:::: {#fs-id1347266 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

A vintage vinyl record is played on a turntable rotating clockwise at a
rate of 45 rotations per minute. Find the angular speed in radians per
second.

3π 2 rad/s
::::

:::: {#fs-id1704000 .note}
::: title
:::

How To

*Given the radius of a circle, an angle of rotation, and a length of
elapsed time, determine the linear speed.*

Convert the total rotation to radians if necessary.

Divide the total rotation in radians by the elapsed time to find the
angular speed: apply

ω

=

θ

t

.

Multiply the angular speed by the length of the radius to find the
linear speed, expressed in terms of the length unit used for the radius
and the time unit used for the elapsed time: apply

v

=

r

ω

.
::::

::: {#Example_07_01_11 .example}
A bicycle has wheels 28 inches in diameter. A tachometer determines the
wheels are rotating at 180 RPM (revolutions per minute). Find the speed
the bicycle is traveling down the road.

Here, we have an angular speed and need to find the corresponding linear
speed, since the linear speed of the outside of the tires is the speed
at which the bicycle travels down the road.

We begin by converting from rotations per minute to radians per minute.
It can be helpful to utilize the units to make this conversion:

$$180\frac{\cancel{\text{rotations}}}{\text{minute}} \cdot \frac{2\pi\;\text{radians}}{\cancel{\text{rotation}}} = 360\pi\frac{\text{radians}}{\text{minute}}$$

Using the formula from above along with the radius of the wheels, we can
find the linear speed:

$$\begin{array}{ccl}
v & = & {\left( \text{14~inches} \right)\left( {360\pi\frac{\text{radians}}{\text{minute}}} \right)} \\
 & = & {5040\pi\frac{\text{inches}}{\text{minute}}}
\end{array}$$

Remember that radians are a unitless measure, so it is not necessary to
include them.

Finally, we may wish to convert this linear speed into a more familiar
measurement, like miles per hour.

$$5040\pi\frac{\cancel{\text{inches}}}{\cancel{\text{minute}}} \cdot \frac{\text{1}\mspace{9mu}\cancel{\text{feet}}}{\text{12}\mspace{9mu}\cancel{\text{inches}}} \cdot \frac{\text{1~mile}}{\text{5280}\mspace{9mu}\cancel{\text{feet}}} \cdot \frac{\text{60}\mspace{9mu}\cancel{\text{minutes}}}{\text{1~hour}} \approx 14.99\mspace{9mu}\text{miles~per~hour~(mph)}$$
:::

:::: {#fs-id2128299 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

A satellite is rotating around Earth at 0.25 radian per hour at an
altitude of 242 km above Earth. If the radius of Earth is 6378
kilometers, find the linear speed of the satellite in kilometers per
hour.

1655 kilometers per hour
::::

:::: {#fs-id2133746 .note}
::: title
:::

Media

Access these online resources for additional instruction and practice
with angles, arc length, and areas of sectors.

Angles in Standard Position

Angle of Rotation

Coterminal Angles

Determining Coterminal Angles

Positive and Negative Coterminal Angles

Radian Measure

Coterminal Angles in Radians

Arc Length and Area of a Sector
::::

# Key Equations {#fs-id1800200}

  --------------------------------------- --------------
  arc length                              s=rθ
  area of a sector                        A= 1 2 θ r 2
  angular speed                           ω= θ t
  linear speed                            v= s t
  linear speed related to angular speed   v=rω
  --------------------------------------- --------------

# Key Concepts {#fs-id2526324}

An angle is formed from the union of two rays, by keeping the initial
side fixed and rotating the terminal side. The amount of rotation
determines the measure of the angle.

An angle is in standard position if its vertex is at the origin and its
initial side lies along the positive

x

-axis. A positive angle is measured counterclockwise from the initial
side and a negative angle is measured clockwise.

To draw an angle in standard position, draw the initial side along the
positive

x

-axis and then place the terminal side according to the fraction of a
full rotation the angle represents. See

.

In addition to degrees, the measure of an angle can be described in
radians. See

.

To convert between degrees and radians, use the proportion

θ

180

=

θ

R

π

.

See

and

.

Two angles that have the same terminal side are called coterminal
angles.

We can find coterminal angles by adding or subtracting

360°

or

2

π

.

See

and

.

Coterminal angles can be found using radians just as they are for
degrees. See

.

The length of a circular arc is a fraction of the circumference of the
entire circle. See

.

The area of sector is a fraction of the area of the entire circle. See

.

An object moving in a circular path has both linear and angular speed.

The angular speed of an object traveling in a circular path is the
measure of the angle through which it turns in a unit of time. See

.

The linear speed of an object traveling along a circular path is the
distance it travels in a unit of time. See

.

# Section Exercises {#fs-id2128654}

## Verbal {#fs-id2128657}

Draw an angle in standard position. Label the vertex, initial side, and
terminal side.

Explain why there are an infinite number of angles that are coterminal
to a certain angle.

State what a positive or negative angle signifies, and explain how to
draw each.

Whether the angle is positive or negative determines the direction. A
positive angle is drawn in the counterclockwise direction, and a
negative angle is drawn in the clockwise direction.

How does radian measure of an angle compare to the degree measure?
Include an explanation of 1 radian in your paragraph.

Explain the differences between linear speed and angular speed when
describing motion along a circular path.

Linear speed is a measurement found by calculating distance of an arc
compared to time. Angular speed is a measurement found by calculating
the angle of an arc compared to time.

## Graphical {#fs-id2183211}

For the following exercises, draw an angle in standard position with the
given measure.

30°

300°

−80°

135°

−150°

2π 3

7π 4

5π 6

π 2

− π 10

415°

For the following exercises, draw an angle in standard position with the
given measure as well as a coterminal angle.

−120°

240°

−315°

22π 3

4π 3

− π 6

− 4π 3

2π 3

For the following exercises, refer to [\#](#). Round to two decimal
places.

<figure id="Figure_07_01_218">

</figure>

Find the arc length.

Find the area of the sector.

7π 2 ≈11.00 in 2

For the following exercises, refer to [\#](#). Round to two decimal
places.

<figure id="Figure_07_01_219">

</figure>

Find the arc length.

Find the area of the sector.

81π 20 ≈12.72 cm 2

## Algebraic {#fs-id2235987}

For the following exercises, convert angles in radians to degrees.

3π 4 radians

π 9 radians

20°

− 5π 4 radians

π 3 radians

60°

− 7π 3 radians

− 5π 12 radians

−75°

11π 6 radians

For the following exercises, convert angles in degrees to radians.

90°

π 2 radians

100°

−540°

−3π radians

−120°

180°

π radians

−315°

150°

5π 6 radians

For the following exercises, use the given information to find the
length of a circular arc. Round to two decimal places.

Find the length of the arc of a circle of radius 12 inches subtended by
a central angle of π 4 . radians.

Find the length of the arc of a circle of radius 5.02 miles subtended by
the central angle of π 3 .

5.02π 3 ≈5.26 miles

Find the length of the arc of a circle of diameter 14 meters subtended
by the central angle of 5π 6 .

Find the length of the arc of a circle of radius 10 centimeters
subtended by the central angle of 50°.

25π 9 ≈8.73 centimeters

Find the length of the arc of a circle of radius 5 inches subtended by
the central angle of 220°.

Find the length of the arc of a circle of diameter 12 meters subtended
by the central angle is 63°.

21π 10 ≈6.60 meters

For the following exercises, use the given information to find the area
of the sector. Round to four decimal places.

A sector of a circle has a central angle of 45° and a radius 6 cm.

A sector of a circle has a central angle of 30° and a radius of 20 cm.

104.7198 cm2

A sector of a circle with diameter 10 feet and an angle of π 2 radians.

A sector of a circle with radius of 0.7 inches and an angle of π
radians.

0.7697 in2

For the following exercises, find the angle between 0° and 360° that is
coterminal to the given angle.

−40°

−110°

250°

700°

1400°

320°

For the following exercises, find the angle between 0 and 2π in radians
that is coterminal to the given angle.

− π 9

10π 3

4π 3

13π 6

44π 9

8π 9

## Real-World Applications {#fs-id2374752}

A truck with 32-inch diameter wheels is traveling at 60 mi/h. Find the
angular speed of the wheels in rad/min. How many revolutions per minute
do the wheels make?

A bicycle with 24-inch diameter wheels is traveling at 15 mi/h. Find the
angular speed of the wheels in rad/min. How many revolutions per minute
do the wheels make?

1320 rad/min 210.085 RPM

A wheel of radius 8 inches is rotating 15°/s. What is the linear speed
v, the angular speed in RPM, and the angular speed in rad/s?

A wheel of radius 14 inches is rotating 0.5 rad/s. What is the linear
speed v, the angular speed in RPM, and the angular speed in deg/s?

7 in./s, 4.77 RPM , 28.65 deg/s

A computer hard drive disc has diameter of 120 millimeters. When playing
audio, the angular speed varies to keep the linear speed constant where
the disc is being read. When reading along the outer edge of the disc,
the angular speed is about 200 RPM (revolutions per minute). Find the
linear speed.

When being burned in a writable CD-R drive, the angular speed of a CD is
often much faster than when playing audio, but the angular speed still
varies to keep the linear speed constant where the disc is being
written. When writing along the outer edge of the disc, the angular
speed of one drive is about 4800 RPM (revolutions per minute). Find the
linear speed if the CD has diameter of 120 millimeters.

1,809,557.37mm/min=30.16m/s

A person is standing on the equator of Earth (radius 3960 miles). What
are their linear and angular speeds?

Find the distance along an arc on the surface of Earth that subtends a
central angle of 5 minutes ( 1minute= 1 60 degree ) . The radius of
Earth is 3960 miles.

5.76 miles

Find the distance along an arc on the surface of Earth that subtends a
central angle of 7 minutes ( 1minute= 1 60 degree ) . The radius of
Earth is 3960 miles.

Consider a clock with an hour hand and minute hand. What is the measure
of the angle the minute hand traces in 20 minutes?

120°

## Extensions {#fs-id2228933}

Two cities have the same longitude. The latitude of city A is 9 degrees
north and the latitude of city B is 30 degrees north. Assume the radius
of the earth is 3960 miles. Find the distance between the two cities.

A city is located at 40 degrees north latitude. Assume the radius of the
earth is 3960 miles and the earth rotates once every 24 hours. Find the
linear speed of a person who resides in this city.

794 miles per hour

A city is located at 75 degrees north latitude. Assume the radius of the
earth is 3960 miles and the earth rotates once every 24 hours. Find the
linear speed of a person who resides in this city.

Find the linear speed of the moon if the average distance between the
earth and moon is 239,000 miles, assuming the orbit of the moon is
circular and requires about 28 days. Express answer in miles per hour.

2,234 miles per hour

A bicycle has wheels 28 inches in diameter. A tachometer determines that
the wheels are rotating at 180 RPM (revolutions per minute). Find the
speed the bicycle is travelling down the road.

A car travels 3 miles. Its tires make 2640 revolutions. What is the
radius of a tire in inches?

11.5 inches

A wheel on a tractor has a 24-inch diameter. How many revolutions does
the wheel make if the tractor travels 4 miles?

# 

angle

the union of two rays having a common endpoint

angular speed

the angle through which a rotating object travels in a unit of time

arc length

the length of the curve formed by an arc

area of a sector

area of a portion of a circle bordered by two radii and the intercepted
arc; the fraction

θ

2

π

.

multiplied by the area of the entire circle

coterminal angles

description of positive and negative angles in standard position sharing
the same terminal side

degree

a unit of measure describing the size of an angle as one-360th of a full
revolution of a circle

initial side

the side of an angle from which rotation begins

linear speed

the distance along a straight path a rotating object travels in a unit
of time; determined by the arc length

measure of an angle

the amount of rotation from the initial side to the terminal side

negative angle

description of an angle measured clockwise from the positive

x

-axis

positive angle

description of an angle measured counterclockwise from the positive

x

-axis

quadrantal angle

an angle whose terminal side lies on an axis

radian measure

the ratio of the arc length formed by an angle divided by the radius of
the circle

radian

the measure of a central angle of a circle that intercepts an arc equal
in length to the radius of that circle

ray

one point on a line and all points extending in one direction from that
point; one side of an angle

reference angle

the measure of the acute angle formed by the terminal side of the angle
and the horizontal axis

standard position

the position of an angle having the vertex at the origin and the initial
side along the positive

x

-axis

terminal side

the side of an angle at which rotation ends

vertex

the common endpoint of two rays that form an angle
