m51284

> In this section you will:
>
> Use right triangles to evaluate trigonometric functions.
>
> Find function values for
>
> 30°
>
> (
>
> π
>
> 6
>
> )
>
> ,
>
> 45°
>
> (
>
> π
>
> 4
>
> )
>
> ,
>
> and
>
> 60°
>
> (
>
> π
>
> 3
>
> )
>
> .
>
> Use equal cofunctions of complementary angles.
>
> Use the deﬁnitions of trigonometric functions of any angle.
>
> Use right-triangle trigonometry to solve applied problems.

7375cfa6-269c-4e0d-a567-bc6a4c66b1f4

Mt. Everest, which straddles the border between China and Nepal, is the
tallest mountain in the world. Measuring its height is no easy task. In
fact, the actual measurement has been a source of controversy for
hundreds of years. The measurement process involves the use of triangles
and a branch of mathematics known as trigonometry. In this section, we
will define a new group of functions known as trigonometric functions,
and find out how they can be used to measure heights, such as those of
the tallest mountains.

# Using Right Triangles to Evaluate Trigonometric Functions {#fs-id1571067}

[\#](#) shows a right triangle with a vertical side of length y and a
horizontal side has length x. Notice that the triangle is inscribed in a
circle of radius 1. Such a circle, with a center at the origin and a
radius of 1, is known as a unit circle.

<figure id="Figure_07_02_001">

</figure>

We can define the trigonometric functions in terms an angle *t* and the
lengths of the sides of the triangle. The adjacent side is the side
closest to the angle, *x*. (Adjacent means "next to.") The opposite side
is the side across from the angle, *y*. The hypotenuse is the side of
the triangle opposite the right angle, 1. These sides are labeled in
[\#](#).

<figure id="Figure_07_02_002">

</figure>

Given a right triangle with an acute angle of t, the first three
trigonometric functions are listed.

$$\begin{array}{lll}
{\mspace{45mu}\text{Sine}} & {\quad\text{sin~}t} & {= \frac{\text{opposite}}{\text{hypotenuse}}}
\end{array}$$

$$\begin{array}{lll}
{\mspace{27mu}\text{Cosine}} & {\quad\text{cos~}t} & {= \frac{\text{adjacent}}{\text{hypotenuse}}}
\end{array}$$

$$\begin{array}{rll}
\text{Tangent} & {\quad\text{tan~}t} & {= \frac{\text{opposite}}{\text{adjacent}}}
\end{array}$$

A common mnemonic for remembering these relationships is SohCahToa,
formed from the first letters of "Sine is opposite over hypotenuse,
Cosine is adjacent over hypotenuse, Tangent is opposite over adjacent."

For the triangle shown in [\#](#), we have the following.

$$\begin{array}{rcl}
{\text{sin~}t} & = & \frac{y}{1} \\
{\text{cos~}t} & = & \frac{x}{1} \\
{\text{tan~}t} & = & \frac{y}{x}
\end{array}$$

:::: {#fs-id2147087 .note}
::: title
:::

How To

*Given the side lengths of a right triangle and one of the acute angles,
find the sine, cosine, and tangent of that angle.*

Find the sine as the ratio of the opposite side to the hypotenuse.

Find the cosine as the ratio of the adjacent side to the hypotenuse.

Find the tangent as the ratio of the opposite side to the adjacent side.
::::

::: {#Example_07_02_01 .example}
Given the triangle shown in [\#](#), find the value of cosα.

<figure id="Figure_07_02_003">

</figure>

The side adjacent to the angle is 15, and the hypotenuse of the triangle
is 17.

$$\begin{array}{ccl}
{\cos(\alpha)} & = & \frac{\text{adjacent}}{\text{hypotenuse}} \\
 & = & \frac{15}{17}
\end{array}$$
:::

:::: {#fs-id1172032 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Given the triangle shown in [\#](#), find the value of sint.

<figure id="Figure_07_02_004">

</figure>

7 25
::::

## Reciprocal Functions {#fs-id2059465}

In addition to sine, cosine, and tangent, there are three more
functions. These too are defined in terms of the sides of the triangle.

$$\begin{array}{lll}
{\qquad\text{Secant}} & {\quad\text{sec~}t} & {= \frac{\text{hypotenuse}}{\text{adjacent}}}
\end{array}$$

$$\begin{array}{rrl}
{\mspace{23mu}\text{Cosecant}} & {\quad\text{csc~}t} & {= \frac{\text{hypotenuse}}{\text{opposite}}}
\end{array}$$

$$\begin{array}{rcl}
\text{Cotangent} & {\quad\text{cot~}t} & {= \frac{\text{adjacent}}{\text{opposite}}}
\end{array}$$

Take another look at these definitions. These functions are the
reciprocals of the first three functions.

$$\begin{array}{rclrcl}
{\text{sin~}t} & = & \frac{1}{\text{csc~}t} & {\qquad\text{csc~}t} & = & \frac{1}{\text{sin~}t} \\
{\text{cos~}t} & = & \frac{1}{\text{sec~}t} & {\qquad\text{sec~}t} & = & \frac{1}{\text{cos~}t} \\
{\text{tan~}t} & = & \frac{1}{\text{cot~}t} & {\qquad\text{cot~}t} & = & \frac{1}{\text{tan~}t}
\end{array}$$

When working with right triangles, keep in mind that the same rules
apply regardless of the orientation of the triangle. In fact, we can
evaluate the six trigonometric functions of either of the two acute
angles in the triangle in [\#](#). The side opposite one acute angle is
the side adjacent to the other acute angle, and vice versa.

<figure id="Figure_07_02_005">

</figure>

Many problems ask for all six trigonometric functions for a given angle
in a triangle. A possible strategy to use is to find the sine, cosine,
and tangent of the angles first. Then, find the other trigonometric
functions easily using the reciprocals.

:::: {#fs-id1544845 .note}
::: title
:::

How To

*Given the side lengths of a right triangle, evaluate the six
trigonometric functions of one of the acute angles.*

If needed, draw the right triangle and label the angle provided.

Identify the angle, the adjacent side, the side opposite the angle, and
the hypotenuse of the right triangle.

Find the required function:

sine as the ratio of the opposite side to the hypotenuse

cosine as the ratio of the adjacent side to the hypotenuse

tangent as the ratio of the opposite side to the adjacent side

secant as the ratio of the hypotenuse to the adjacent side

cosecant as the ratio of the hypotenuse to the opposite side

cotangent as the ratio of the adjacent side to the opposite side
::::

::: {#Example_07_02_02 .example}
Using the triangle shown in [\#](#), evaluate
sinα,cosα,tanα,secα,cscα,andcotα.

<figure id="Figure_07_02_006">

</figure>

$$\begin{array}{rll}
{\text{sin~}\alpha} & {= \frac{\text{opposite~}\alpha}{\text{hypotenuse}}} & {= \frac{4}{5}} \\
{\text{cos~}\alpha} & {= \frac{\text{adjacent~to~}\alpha}{\text{hypotenuse}}} & {= \frac{3}{5}} \\
{\text{tan~}\alpha} & {= \frac{\text{opposite~}\alpha}{\text{adjacent~to~}\alpha}} & {= \frac{4}{3}} \\
{\text{sec~}\alpha} & {= \frac{\text{hypotenuse}}{\text{adjacent~to~}\alpha}} & {= \frac{5}{3}} \\
{\text{csc~}\alpha} & {= \frac{\text{hypotenuse}}{\text{opposite~}\alpha}} & {= \frac{5}{4}} \\
{\text{cot~}\alpha} & {= \frac{\text{adjacent~to~}\alpha}{\text{opposite~}\alpha}} & {= \frac{3}{4}}
\end{array}$$

Another approach would have been to find sine, cosine, and tangent
first. Then find their reciprocals to determine the other functions.

$$\text{sec~}\alpha = \frac{1}{\text{cos~}\alpha} = \frac{1}{\frac{3}{5}} = \frac{5}{3}$$

$$\text{csc~}\alpha = \frac{1}{\text{sin~}\alpha} = \frac{1}{\frac{4}{5}} = \frac{5}{4}$$

$$\text{cot~}\alpha = \frac{1}{\text{tan~}\alpha} = \frac{1}{\frac{4}{3}} = \frac{3}{4}$$
:::

:::: {#fs-id1484942 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Using the triangle shown in [\#](#),evaluate
sint,cost,tant,sect,csct,andcott.

<figure id="Figure_07_02_007">

</figure>

sin t = 33 65 , cos t = 56 65 , tan t = 33 56 , sec t = 65 56 , csc t =
65 33 , cot t = 56 33
::::

## Finding Trigonometric Functions of Special Angles Using Side Lengths {#fs-id926559}

It is helpful to evaluate the trigonometric functions as they relate to
the special angles---multiples of 30°,60°, and 45°. Remember, however,
that when dealing with right triangles, we are limited to angles between
0° and 90°.

Suppose we have a 30°,60°,90° triangle, which can also be described as a
π 6 , π 3 , π 2 triangle. The sides have lengths in the relation s, 3 s
,2s. The sides of a 45°,45°,90° triangle, which can also be described as
a π 4 , π 4 , π 2 triangle, have lengths in the relation s,s, 2 s. These
relations are shown in [\#](#).

<figure id="Figure_07_02_008">

</figure>

We can then use the ratios of the side lengths to evaluate trigonometric
functions of special angles.

:::: {#fs-id1431935 .note}
::: title
:::

How To

*Given trigonometric functions of a special angle, evaluate using side
lengths.*

Use the side lengths shown in

for the special angle you wish to evaluate.

Use the ratio of side lengths appropriate to the function you wish to
evaluate.
::::

::: {#Example_07_02_03 .example}
Find the exact value of the trigonometric functions of π 3 , using side
lengths.

$$\begin{array}{rlllc}
{\sin\left( \frac{\pi}{3} \right)} & {= \frac{\text{opp}}{\text{hyp}}} & {= \frac{\sqrt{3s}}{2s}} & {= \frac{\sqrt{3}}{2}} & \\
{\cos\left( \frac{\pi}{3} \right)} & {= \frac{\text{adj}}{\text{hyp}}} & {= \frac{s}{2s}} & {= \frac{1}{2}} & \\
{\tan\left( \frac{\pi}{3} \right)} & {= \frac{\text{opp}}{\text{adj}}} & {= \frac{\sqrt{3}s}{s}} & {= \sqrt{3}} & \\
{\sec\left( \frac{\pi}{3} \right)} & {= \frac{\text{hyp}}{\text{adj}}} & {= \frac{2s}{s}} & {= 2} & \\
{\csc\left( \frac{\pi}{3} \right)} & {= \frac{\text{hyp}}{\text{opp}}} & {= \frac{2s}{\sqrt{3}s}} & {= \frac{2}{\sqrt{3}}} & {= \frac{2\sqrt{3}}{3}} \\
{\cot\left( \frac{\pi}{3} \right)} & {= \frac{\text{adj}}{\text{opp}}} & {= \frac{s}{\sqrt{3}s}} & {= \frac{1}{\sqrt{3}}} & {= \frac{\sqrt{3}}{3}}
\end{array}$$
:::

:::: {#fs-id1501618 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Find the exact value of the trigonometric functions of π 4 , using side
lengths.

sin( π 4 ) = 2 2 ,cos( π 4 )= 2 2 ,tan( π 4 )=1, sec( π 4 ) = 2 ,csc( π
4 )= 2 ,cot( π 4 )=1
::::

# Using Equal Cofunction of Complements {#fs-id1720304}

If we look more closely at the relationship between the sine and cosine
of the special angles, we notice a pattern. In a right triangle with
angles of π 6 and π 3 , we see that the sine of π 3 , namely 3 2 , is
also the cosine of π 6 , while the sine of π 6 , namely 1 2 , is also
the cosine of π 3 .

$$\begin{array}{rlll}
{\sin\frac{\pi}{3}} & {= \cos\frac{\pi}{6}} & {= \frac{\sqrt{3}s}{2s}} & {= \frac{\sqrt{3}}{2}} \\
{\sin\frac{\pi}{6}} & {= \cos\frac{\pi}{3}} & {= \frac{s}{2s}} & {= \frac{1}{2}}
\end{array}$$

See [\#](#).

<figure id="Figure_07_02_009">

</figure>

This result should not be surprising because, as we see from [\#](#),
the side opposite the angle of π 3 is also the side adjacent to π 6 , so
sin( π 3 ) and cos( π 6 ) are exactly the same ratio of the same two
sides, 3 s and 2s. Similarly, cos( π 3 ) and sin( π 6 ) are also the
same ratio using the same two sides, s and 2s.

The interrelationship between the sines and cosines of π 6 and π 3 also
holds for the two acute angles in any right triangle, since in every
case, the ratio of the same two sides would constitute the sine of one
angle and the cosine of the other. Since the three angles of a triangle
add to π, and the right angle is π 2 , the remaining two angles must
also add up to π 2 . That means that a right triangle can be formed with
any two angles that add to π 2 ---in other words, any two complementary
angles. So we may state a *cofunction identity*: If any two angles are
complementary, the sine of one is the cosine of the other, and vice
versa. This identity is illustrated in [\#](#).

<figure id="Figure_07_02_010">

</figure>

Using this identity, we can state without calculating, for instance,
that the sine of π 12 equals the cosine of 5π 12 , and that the sine of
5π 12 equals the cosine of π 12 . We can also state that if, for a given
angle t,cost= 5 13 , then sin( π 2 −t )= 5 13 as well.

:::: {#fs-id1604971 .note}
::: title
Cofunction Identities
:::

The cofunction identities in radians are listed in [\#](#).

  -------------------- --------------------
  cost=sin( π 2 −t )   sint=cos( π 2 −t )
  tant=cot( π 2 −t )   cott=tan( π 2 −t )
  sect=csc( π 2 −t )   csct=sec( π 2 −t )
  -------------------- --------------------
::::

:::: {#fs-id1548741 .note}
::: title
:::

How To

*Given the sine and cosine of an angle, find the sine or cosine of its
complement.*

To find the sine of the complementary angle, find the cosine of the
original angle.

To find the cosine of the complementary angle, find the sine of the
original angle.
::::

::: {#Example_07_02_04 .example}
If sint= 5 12 , find cos( π 2 −t ).

According to the cofunction identities for sine and cosine, we have the
following.

$$\sin\; t = \cos\;\left( {\frac{\pi}{2} - t} \right)$$

So

$$\cos\;\left( {\frac{\pi}{2} - t} \right) = \frac{5}{12}$$
:::

:::: {#fs-id2181922 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

If csc( π 6 )=2, find sec( π 3 ).

2
::::

# Using Trigonometric Functions {#fs-id1621636}

In previous examples, we evaluated the sine and cosine in triangles
where we knew all three sides. But the real power of right-triangle
trigonometry emerges when we look at triangles in which we know an angle
but do not know all the sides.

:::: {#fs-id1553929 .note}
::: title
:::

How To

*Given a right triangle, the length of one side, and the measure of one
acute angle, find the remaining sides.*

For each side, select the trigonometric function that has the unknown
side as either the numerator or the denominator. The known side will in
turn be the denominator or the numerator.

Write an equation setting the function value of the known angle equal to
the ratio of the corresponding sides.

Using the value of the trigonometric function and the known side length,
solve for the missing side length.
::::

::: {#Example_07_02_05 .example}
Find the unknown sides of the triangle in [\#](#).

<figure id="Figure_07_02_011">

</figure>

We know the angle and the opposite side, so we can use the tangent to
find the adjacent side.

$$\tan(30{^\circ}) = \frac{7}{a}$$

We rearrange to solve for a.

$$\begin{array}{ccl}
a & = & \frac{7}{\tan(30{^\circ})} \\
 & \approx & 12.1
\end{array}$$

We can use the sine to find the hypotenuse.

$$\sin(30{^\circ}) = \frac{7}{c}$$

Again, we rearrange to solve for c.

$$\begin{array}{ccl}
c & = & \frac{7}{\sin(30{^\circ})} \\
 & = & 14
\end{array}$$
:::

:::: {#fs-id1843218 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

A right triangle has one angle of π 3 and a hypotenuse of 20. Find the
unknown sides and angle of the triangle.

adjacent=10;opposite=10 3 ; missing angle is π 6
::::

# Using Right Triangle Trigonometry to Solve Applied Problems {#fs-id1379853}

Right-triangle trigonometry has many practical applications. For
example, the ability to compute the lengths of sides of a triangle makes
it possible to find the height of a tall object without climbing to the
top or having to extend a tape measure along its height. We do so by
measuring a distance from the base of the object to a point on the
ground some distance away, where we can look up to the top of the tall
object at an angle. The angle of elevation of an object above an
observer relative to the observer is the angle between the horizontal
and the line from the object to the observer\'s eye. The right triangle
this position creates has sides that represent the unknown height, the
measured distance from the base, and the angled line of sight from the
ground to the top of the object. Knowing the measured distance to the
base of the object and the angle of the line of sight, we can use
trigonometric functions to calculate the unknown height.

Similarly, we can form a triangle from the top of a tall object by
looking downward. The angle of depression of an object below an observer
relative to the observer is the angle between the horizontal and the
line from the object to the observer\'s eye. See [\#](#).

<figure id="Figure_07_02_013">

</figure>

:::: {#fs-id1416497 .note}
::: title
:::

How To

*Given a tall object, measure its height indirectly.*

Make a sketch of the problem situation to keep track of known and
unknown information.

Lay out a measured distance from the base of the object to a point where
the top of the object is clearly visible.

At the other end of the measured distance, look up to the top of the
object. Measure the angle the line of sight makes with the horizontal.

Write an equation relating the unknown height, the measured distance,
and the tangent of the angle of the line of sight.

Solve the equation for the unknown height.
::::

::: {#Example_07_02_06 .example}
To find the height of a tree, a person walks to a point 30 feet from the
base of the tree. She measures an angle of 57° between a line of sight
to the top of the tree and the ground, as shown in [\#](#). Find the
height of the tree.

<figure id="Figure_07_02_012">

</figure>

We know that the angle of elevation is 57° and the adjacent side is 30
ft long. The opposite side is the unknown height.

The trigonometric function relating the side opposite to an angle and
the side adjacent to the angle is the tangent. So we will state our
information in terms of the tangent of 57°, letting h be the unknown
height.

$$\begin{array}{rclc}
{\text{tan~}\theta} & = & \frac{\text{opposite}}{\text{adjacent}} & \\
{\text{tan}(57{^\circ})} & = & \frac{h}{30} & {\quad\text{Solve~for~}h.} \\
h & = & {\text{30tan}\left( \text{57°} \right)} & {\quad\text{Multiply}\text{.}} \\
h & \approx & 46.2 & {\quad\text{Use~a~calculator}\text{.}}
\end{array}$$

The tree is approximately 46 feet tall.
:::

:::: {#fs-id1615118 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

How long a ladder is needed to reach a windowsill 50 feet above the
ground if the ladder rests against the building making an angle of 5π 12
with the ground? Round to the nearest foot.

About 52 ft
::::

:::: {#fs-id1549810 .note}
::: title
:::

Media

Access these online resources for additional instruction and practice
with right triangle trigonometry.

Finding Trig Functions on Calculator

Finding Trig Functions Using a Right Triangle

Relate Trig Functions to Sides of a Right Triangle

Determine Six Trig Functions from a Triangle

Determine Length of Right Triangle Side
::::

# Key Equations {#fs-id1800200}

  ------------------------------------ -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Trigonometric Functions              Sine sin t= opposite hypotenuse Cosine cos t= adjacent hypotenuse Tangent tan t= opposite adjacent Secant sec t= hypotenuse adjacent Cosecant csc t= hypotenuse opposite Cotangent cot t= adjacent opposite
  Reciprocal Trigonometric Functions   sin t= 1 csc t csc t= 1 sin t cos t= 1 sec t sec t= 1 cos t tan t= 1 cot t cot t= 1 tan t
  Cofunction Identities                cos t=sin( π 2 −t ) sin t=cos( π 2 −t ) tan t=cot( π 2 −t ) cot t=tan( π 2 −t ) sec t=csc( π 2 −t )
  ------------------------------------ -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Key Concepts {#fs-id2091048}

We can define trigonometric functions as ratios of the side lengths of a
right triangle. See

.

The same side lengths can be used to evaluate the trigonometric
functions of either acute angle in a right triangle. See

.

We can evaluate the trigonometric functions of special angles, knowing
the side lengths of the triangles in which they occur. See

.

Any two complementary angles could be the two acute angles of a right
triangle.

If two angles are complementary, the cofunction identities state that
the sine of one equals the cosine of the other and vice versa. See

.

We can use trigonometric functions of an angle to find unknown side
lengths.

Select the trigonometric function representing the ratio of the unknown
side to the known side. See

.

Right-triangle trigonometry facilitates the measurement of inaccessible
heights and distances.

The unknown height or distance can be found by creating a right triangle
in which the unknown height or distance is one of the sides, and another
side and angle are known. See

.

# Section Exercises {#fs-id917826}

## Verbal {#fs-id1709355}

For the given right triangle, label the adjacent side, opposite side,
and hypotenuse for the indicated angle.

When a right triangle with a hypotenuse of 1 is placed in a circle of
radius 1, which sides of the triangle correspond to the *x*- and
*y*-coordinates?

The tangent of an angle compares which sides of the right triangle?

The tangent of an angle is the ratio of the opposite side to the
adjacent side.

What is the relationship between the two acute angles in a right
triangle?

Explain the cofunction identity.

For example, the sine of an angle is equal to the cosine of its
complement; the cosine of an angle is equal to the sine of its
complement.

## Algebraic {#fs-id1569844}

For the following exercises, use cofunctions of complementary angles.

cos( 34° )=sin( \_\_\_° )

cos( π 3 )=sin( \_\_\_ )

π 6

csc( 21° )=sec( \_\_\_° )

tan( π 4 )=cot( \_\_\_ )

π 4

For the following exercises, find the lengths of the missing sides if
side a is opposite angle A, side b is opposite angle B, and side c is
the hypotenuse.

cosB= 4 5 ,a=10

sinB= 1 2 ,a=20

b= 20 3 3 ,c= 40 3 3

tanA= 5 12 ,b=6

tanA=100,b=100

a=10,000,c=10,000.5

sinB= 1 3 ,a=2

a=5,∡A=60°

b= 5 3 3 ,c= 10 3 3

c=12,∡A=45°

## Graphical {#fs-id2247884}

For the following exercises, use [\#](#) to evaluate each trigonometric
function of angle A.

<figure id="Figure_07_04_203">

</figure>

sinA

5 29 29

cosA

tanA

5 2

cscA

secA

29 2

cotA

For the following exercises, use [\#](#) to evaluate each trigonometric
function of angle A.

<figure id="Figure_07_04_204">

</figure>

sinA

5 41 41

cosA

tanA

5 4

cscA

secA

41 4

cotA

For the following exercises, solve for the unknown sides of the given
triangle.

c=14,b=7 3

a=15,b=15

## Technology {#fs-id1801729}

For the following exercises, use a calculator to find the length of each
side to four decimal places.

b=9.9970,c=12.2041

a=2.0838,b=11.8177

b=15,∡B=15°

a=55.9808,c=57.9555

c=200,∡B=5°

c=50,∡B=21°

a=46.6790,b=17.9184

a=30,∡A=27°

b=3.5,∡A=78°

a=16.4662,c=16.8341

## Extensions {#fs-id1622995}

Find x.

Find x.

188.3159

Find x.

Find x.

200.6737

A radio tower is located 400 feet from a building. From a window in the
building, a person determines that the angle of elevation to the top of
the tower is 36°, and that the angle of depression to the bottom of the
tower is 23°. How tall is the tower?

A radio tower is located 325 feet from a building. From a window in the
building, a person determines that the angle of elevation to the top of
the tower is 43°, and that the angle of depression to the bottom of the
tower is 31°. How tall is the tower?

498.3471 ft

A 200-foot tall monument is located in the distance. From a window in a
building, a person determines that the angle of elevation to the top of
the monument is 15°, and that the angle of depression to the bottom of
the monument is 2°. How far is the person from the monument?

A 400-foot tall monument is located in the distance. From a window in a
building, a person determines that the angle of elevation to the top of
the monument is 18°, and that the angle of depression to the bottom of
the monument is 3°. How far is the person from the monument?

1060.09 ft

There is an antenna on the top of a building. From a location 300 feet
from the base of the building, the angle of elevation to the top of the
building is measured to be 40°. From the same location, the angle of
elevation to the top of the antenna is measured to be 43°. Find the
height of the antenna.

There is lightning rod on the top of a building. From a location 500
feet from the base of the building, the angle of elevation to the top of
the building is measured to be 36°. From the same location, the angle of
elevation to the top of the lightning rod is measured to be 38°. Find
the height of the lightning rod.

27.372 ft

## Real-World Applications {#fs-id2165390}

A 33-ft ladder leans against a building so that the angle between the
ground and the ladder is 80°. How high does the ladder reach up the side
of the building?

A 23-ft ladder leans against a building so that the angle between the
ground and the ladder is 80°. How high does the ladder reach up the side
of the building?

22.6506 ft  

The angle of elevation to the top of a building in Charlotte is found to
be 9 degrees from the ground at a distance of 1 mile from the base of
the building. Using this information, find the height of the building.

The angle of elevation to the top of a building in Seattle is found to
be 2 degrees from the ground at a distance of 2 miles from the base of
the building. Using this information, find the height of the building.

368.7633 ft

Assuming that a 370-foot tall giant redwood grows vertically, if I walk
a certain distance from the tree and measure the angle of elevation to
the top of the tree to be 60°, how far from the base of the tree am I?

# 

adjacent side

in a right triangle, the side between a given angle and the right angle

angle of depression

the angle between the horizontal and the line from the object to the
observer's eye, assuming the object is positioned lower than the
observer

angle of elevation

the angle between the horizontal and the line from the object to the
observer's eye, assuming the object is positioned higher than the
observer

opposite side

in a right triangle, the side most distant from a given angle

hypotenuse

the side of a right triangle opposite the right angle

unit circle

a circle with a center at

(

0

,

0

)

and radius 1
