m51285

> In this section you will:
>
> Find function values for the sine and cosine of
>
> 30°
>
>  or 
>
> (
>
> π
>
> 6
>
> )
>
> ,
>
> 45°
>
>  or 
>
> (
>
> π
>
> 4
>
> )
>
> ,
>
> and
>
> 60
>
> ∘
>
>  or 
>
> (
>
> π
>
> 3
>
> )
>
> .
>
> Identify the domain and range of sine and cosine functions.
>
> Find reference angles.
>
> Use reference angles to evaluate trigonometric functions.

89e9d4e5-e3b8-4aa4-8de5-aa34b02b9b07

<figure id="Figure_07_03_001">

</figure>

Looking for a thrill? Then consider a ride on the Ain Dubai, the
world\'s tallest Ferris wheel. Located in Dubai, the most populous city
and the financial and tourism hub of the United Arab Emirates, the wheel
soars to 820 feet, about 1.5 tenths of a mile. Described as an
observation wheel, riders enjoy spectacular views of the Burj Khalifa
(the world\'s tallest building) and the Palm Jumeirah (a human-made
archipelago home to over 10,000 people and 20 resorts) as they travel
from the ground to the peak and down again in a repeating pattern. In
this section, we will examine this type of revolving motion around a
circle. To do so, we need to define the type of circle first, and then
place that circle on a coordinate system. Then we can discuss circular
motion in terms of the coordinate pairs.

# Finding Trigonometric Functions Using the Unit Circle {#fs-id1700147}

We have already defined the trigonometric functions in terms of right
triangles. In this section, we will redefine them in terms of the unit
circle. Recall that a unit circle is a circle centered at the origin
with radius 1, as shown in [\#](#). The angle (in radians) that t
intercepts forms an arc of length s. Using the formula s=rt, and knowing
that r=1, we see that for a unit circle, s=t.

The *x-* and *y-*axes divide the coordinate plane into four quarters
called quadrants. We label these quadrants to mimic the direction a
positive angle would sweep. The four quadrants are labeled I, II, III,
and IV.

For any angle t, we can label the intersection of the terminal side and
the unit circle as by its coordinates, ( x,y ). The coordinates x and y
will be the outputs of the trigonometric functions f(t)=cost and
f(t)=sint, respectively. This means x=cos t and y=sin t.

<figure id="Figure_07_03_002">

</figure>

:::: {#fs-id1367435 .note}
::: title
Unit Circle
:::

A unit circle has a center at (0,0) and radius 1. In a unit circle, the
length of the intercepted arc is equal to the radian measure of the
central angle t.

Let ( x,y ) be the endpoint on the unit circle of an arc of arc length
s. The ( x,y ) coordinates of this point can be described as functions
of the angle.
::::

## Defining Sine and Cosine Functions from the Unit Circle {#fs-id2084883}

The sine function relates a real number t to the *y*-coordinate of the
point where the corresponding angle intercepts the unit circle. More
precisely, the sine of an angle t equals the *y*-value of the endpoint
on the unit circle of an arc of length t. In [\#](#), the sine is equal
to y. Like all functions, the sine function has an input and an output.
Its input is the measure of the angle; its output is the *y*-coordinate
of the corresponding point on the unit circle.

The cosine function of an angle t equals the *x*-value of the endpoint
on the unit circle of an arc of length t. In [\#](#), the cosine is
equal to x.

<figure id="Figure_07_03_003">

</figure>

Because it is understood that sine and cosine are functions, we do not
always need to write them with parentheses: sint is the same as sin(t)
and cost is the same as cos(t). Likewise, cos 2 t is a commonly used
shorthand notation for (cos(t)) 2 . Be aware that many calculators and
computers do not recognize the shorthand notation. When in doubt, use
the extra parentheses when entering calculations into a calculator or
computer.

:::: {#fs-id2200371 .note}
::: title
Sine and Cosine Functions
:::

If t is a real number and a point ( x,y ) on the unit circle corresponds
to a central angle t, then

$$\cos\; t = x$$

$$\sin\; t = y$$
::::

:::: {#fs-id1682008 .note}
::: title
:::

How To

*Given a point *P* (x,y) on the unit circle corresponding to an angle of
t, find the sine and cosine.*

The sine of

t

is equal to the

y

-coordinate of point

P

:

sin 

t

 = 

y

.

The cosine of

t

is equal to the

x

-coordinate of point

P

:

cos

t

=

x

.
::::

::: {#Example_07_03_01 .example}
Point P is a point on the unit circle corresponding to an angle of t, as
shown in [\#](#). Find cos(t) and sin(t).

<figure id="Figure_07_03_004">

</figure>

We know that cost is the *x*-coordinate of the corresponding point on
the unit circle and sint is the *y*-coordinate of the corresponding
point on the unit circle. So:

$$\begin{array}{cll}
x & {= \cos\; t} & {= \frac{1}{2}} \\
y & {= \sin\; t} & {= \frac{\sqrt{3}}{2}}
\end{array}$$
:::

:::: {#fs-id2351910 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

A certain angle t corresponds to a point on the unit circle at ( − 2 2 ,
2 2 ) as shown in [\#](#). Find cost and sint.

<figure id="Figure_07_03_005">

</figure>

cos(t)=− 2 2 ,sin(t)= 2 2
::::

## Finding Sines and Cosines of Angles on an Axis {#fs-id2052108}

For quadrantral angles, the corresponding point on the unit circle falls
on the *x-* or *y*-axis. In that case, we can easily calculate cosine
and sine from the values of x and y.

::: {#Example_07_03_02 .example}
Find cos(90°) and sin(90°).

Moving 90° counterclockwise around the unit circle from the positive
*x*-axis brings us to the top of the circle, where the (x,y) coordinates
are (0,1), as shown in [\#](#).

<figure id="Figure_07_03_006">

</figure>

We can then use our definitions of cosine and sine.

$$\begin{array}{rlll}
x & {= \text{cos~}t} & {= \cos(90{^\circ})} & {= 0} \\
y & {= \text{sin~}t} & {= \sin(90{^\circ})} & {= 1}
\end{array}$$

The cosine of 90° is 0; the sine of 90° is 1.
:::

:::: {#fs-id1841712 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Find cosine and sine of the angle π.

cos(π)=−1,sin(π)=0
::::

## The Pythagorean Identity {#fs-id1711970}

Now that we can define sine and cosine, we will learn how they relate to
each other and the unit circle. Recall that the equation for the unit
circle is x 2 + y 2 =1. Because x=cost and y=sint, we can substitute for
x and y to get cos 2 t+ sin 2 t=1. This equation, cos 2 t+ sin 2 t=1, is
known as the Pythagorean Identity. See [\#](#).

<figure id="Figure_07_03_007">

</figure>

We can use the Pythagorean Identity to find the cosine of an angle if we
know the sine, or vice versa. However, because the equation yields two
solutions, we need additional knowledge of the angle to choose the
solution with the correct sign. If we know the quadrant where the angle
is, we can easily choose the correct solution.

:::: {#fs-id1475908 .note}
::: title
Pythagorean Identity
:::

The Pythagorean Identity states that, for any real number t,

$$\cos^{2}t + \sin^{2}t = 1$$
::::

:::: {#fs-id2196700 .note}
::: title
:::

How To

*Given the sine of some angle t and its quadrant location, find the
cosine of t.*

Substitute the known value of

sin

t

into the Pythagorean Identity.

Solve for

cos

t

.

Choose the solution with the appropriate sign for the

x

-values in the quadrant where

t

is located.
::::

::: {#Example_07_03_03 .example}
If sin(t)= 3 7 and t is in the second quadrant, find cos(t).

If we drop a vertical line from the point on the unit circle
corresponding to t, we create a right triangle, from which we can see
that the Pythagorean Identity is simply one case of the Pythagorean
Theorem. See [\#](#).

<figure id="Figure_07_03_008">

</figure>

Substituting the known value for sine into the Pythagorean Identity,

$$\begin{array}{rcl}
{\text{cos}^{2}(t) + \sin^{2}(t)} & = & 1 \\
{\text{cos}^{2}(t) + \frac{9}{49}} & = & 1 \\
{\text{cos}^{2}(t)} & = & \frac{40}{49} \\
{\text{cos}(t)} & = & {\pm \sqrt{\frac{40}{49}} = \pm \frac{\sqrt{40}}{7} = \pm \frac{2\sqrt{10}}{7}}
\end{array}$$

Because the angle is in the second quadrant, we know the *x-*value is a
negative real number, so the cosine is also negative.

$$\text{cos}(t) = - \frac{2\sqrt{10}}{7}$$
:::

:::: {#fs-id1586782 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

If cos(t)= 24 25 and t is in the fourth quadrant, find sin(t).

sin(t)=− 7 25
::::

# Finding Sines and Cosines of Special Angles {#fs-id1602132}

We have already learned some properties of the special angles, such as
the conversion from radians to degrees, and we found their sines and
cosines using right triangles. We can also calculate sines and cosines
of the special angles using the Pythagorean Identity.

## Finding Sines and Cosines of 45° Angles {#fs-id1725088}

First, we will look at angles of 45° or π 4 , as shown in [\#](#). A
45°--45°--90° triangle is an isosceles triangle, so the *x-* and
*y*-coordinates of the corresponding point on the circle are the same.
Because the *x-* and *y*-values are the same, the sine and cosine values
will also be equal.

<figure id="Figure_07_03_009">

</figure>

At t= π 4 , which is 45 degrees, the radius of the unit circle bisects
the first quadrantal angle. This means the radius lies along the line
y=x. A unit circle has a radius equal to 1 so the right triangle formed
below the line y=x has sides x and y (y=x), and radius = 1. See [\#](#).

<figure id="Figure_07_03_018">

</figure>

From the Pythagorean Theorem we get

$$x^{2} + y^{2} = 1$$

We can then substitute y=x.

$$x^{2} + x^{2} = 1$$

Next we combine like terms.

$$2x^{2} = 1$$

And solving for x, we get

$$\begin{array}{rcl}
x^{2} & = & \frac{1}{2} \\
x & = & {\pm \frac{1}{\sqrt{2}}}
\end{array}$$

In quadrant I, x= 1 2 .

At t= π 4 or 45 degrees,

$$\begin{array}{rcl}
\left( {x,y} \right) & = & {\left( {x,x} \right) = \left( {\frac{1}{\sqrt{2}},\frac{1}{\sqrt{2}}} \right)} \\
x & = & {\frac{1}{\sqrt{2}},y = \frac{1}{\sqrt{2}}} \\
{\text{cos~}t} & = & {\frac{1}{\sqrt{2}},\text{sin~}t = \frac{1}{\sqrt{2}}}
\end{array}$$

If we then rationalize the denominators, we get

$$\begin{matrix}
{\text{cos~}t} & = & {\frac{1}{\sqrt{2}}\frac{\sqrt{2}}{\sqrt{2}}} \\
 & = & \frac{\sqrt{2}}{2} \\
{\text{sin~}t} & = & {\frac{1}{\sqrt{2}}\frac{\sqrt{2}}{\sqrt{2}}} \\
 & = & \frac{\sqrt{2}}{2}
\end{matrix}$$

Therefore, the (x,y) coordinates of a point on a circle of radius 1 at
an angle of 45° are ( 2 2 , 2 2 ).

## Finding Sines and Cosines of 30° and 60° Angles {#fs-id1052408}

Next, we will find the cosine and sine at an angle of 30°, or π 6 .
First, we will draw a triangle inside a circle with one side at an angle
of 30°, and another at an angle of −30°, as shown in [\#](#). If the
resulting two right triangles are combined into one large triangle,
notice that all three angles of this larger triangle will be 60°, as
shown in [\#](#).

<figure id="Figure_07_03_010">

</figure>

<figure id="Figure_07_03_011">

</figure>

Because all the angles are equal, the sides are also equal. The vertical
line has length 2y, and since the sides are all equal, we can also
conclude that r=2y or y= 1 2 r. Since sint=y,

$$\sin\left( \frac{\pi}{6} \right) = \frac{1}{2}r$$

And since r=1 in our unit circle,

$$\begin{matrix}
{\sin\left( \frac{\pi}{6} \right)} & = & {\frac{1}{2}(1)} \\
 & = & \frac{1}{2}
\end{matrix}$$

Using the Pythagorean Identity, we can find the cosine value.

$$\begin{array}{rclc}
{\cos^{2}\left( \frac{\pi}{6} \right) + \sin^{2}\left( \frac{\pi}{6} \right)} & = & 1 & \\
{\cos^{2}\left( \frac{\pi}{6} \right) + \left( \frac{1}{2} \right)^{2}} & = & 1 & \\
{\cos^{2}\left( \frac{\pi}{6} \right)} & = & \frac{3}{4} & {\quad\text{Use~the~square~root~property}.} \\
{\cos\left( \frac{\pi}{6} \right)} & = & {\frac{\pm \sqrt{3}}{\pm \sqrt{4}} = \frac{\sqrt{3}}{2}} & {\quad\text{Since~}y\text{~is~positive,~choose~the~positive~root}.}
\end{array}$$

The (x,y) coordinates for the point on a circle of radius 1 at an angle
of 30° are ( 3 2 , 1 2 ). At t= π 3  (60°), the radius of the unit
circle, 1, serves as the hypotenuse of a 30-60-90 degree right triangle,
BAD, as shown in [\#](#). Angle A has measure 60°. At point B, we draw
an angle ABC with measure of 60°. We know the angles in a triangle sum
to 180°, so the measure of angle C is also 60°. Now we have an
equilateral triangle. Because each side of the equilateral triangle ABC
is the same length, and we know one side is the radius of the unit
circle, all sides must be of length 1.

<figure id="Figure_07_03_019">

</figure>

The measure of angle ABD is 30°. Angle ABC is double angle ABD, so its
measure is 60°. BD is the perpendicular bisector of AC, so it cuts AC in
half. This means that AD is 1 2 the radius, or 1 2 . Notice that AD is
the *x*-coordinate of point B, which is at the intersection of the 60°
angle and the unit circle. This gives us a triangle BAD with hypotenuse
of 1 and side x of length 1 2 .

From the Pythagorean Theorem, we get

$$x^{2} + y^{2} = 1$$

Substituting x= 1 2 , we get

$$\left( \frac{1}{2} \right)^{2} + y^{2} = 1$$

Solving for y, we get

$$\begin{array}{rcl}
{\frac{1}{4} + y^{2}} & = & 1 \\
y^{2} & = & {1 - \frac{1}{4}} \\
y^{2} & = & \frac{3}{4} \\
y & = & {\pm \frac{\sqrt{3}}{2}}
\end{array}$$

Since t= π 3 has the terminal side in quadrant I where the
*y-*coordinate is positive, we choose y= 3 2 , the positive value.

At t= π 3 (60°), the (x,y) coordinates for the point on a circle of
radius 1 at an angle of 60° are ( 1 2 , 3 2 ), so we can find the sine
and cosine.

$$\begin{array}{rcl}
{(x,y)} & = & \left( {\frac{1}{2},\frac{\sqrt{3}}{2}} \right) \\
x & = & {\frac{1}{2},y = \frac{\sqrt{3}}{2}} \\
{\text{cos~}t} & = & {\frac{1}{2},\text{sin~}t = \frac{\sqrt{3}}{2}}
\end{array}$$

We have now found the cosine and sine values for all of the most
commonly encountered angles in the first quadrant of the unit circle.
[\#](#) summarizes these values.

  ---------- --- -------------- -------------- -------------- --------------
  *Angle*    0   π 6 , or 30°   π 4 , or 45°   π 3 , or 60°   π 2 , or 90°
  *Cosine*   1   3 2            2 2            1 2            0
  *Sine*     0   1 2            2 2            3 2            1
  ---------- --- -------------- -------------- -------------- --------------

[\#](#) shows the common angles in the first quadrant of the unit
circle.

<figure id="Figure_07_03_021">

</figure>

## Using a Calculator to Find Sine and Cosine {#fs-id1540859}

To find the cosine and sine of angles other than the special angles, we
turn to a computer or calculator. *Be aware*: Most calculators can be
set into "degree" or "radian" mode, which tells the calculator the units
for the input value. When we evaluate cos(30) on our calculator, it will
evaluate it as the cosine of 30 degrees if the calculator is in degree
mode, or the cosine of 30 radians if the calculator is in radian mode.

:::: {#fs-id2063619 .note}
::: title
:::

How To

*Given an angle in radians, use a graphing calculator to find the
cosine.*

If the calculator has degree mode and radian mode, set it to radian
mode.

Press the COS key.

Enter the radian value of the angle and press the close-parentheses key
\")\".

Press ENTER.
::::

::: {#Example_07_03_04 .example}
Evaluate cos( 5π 3 ) using a graphing calculator or computer.

Enter the following keystrokes:

COS( 5 × π ÷ 3 ) ENTER

$$\cos\left( \frac{5\pi}{3} \right) = 0.5$$

We can find the cosine or sine of an angle in degrees directly on a
calculator with degree mode. For calculators or software that use only
radian mode, we can find the sine of 20°, for example, by including the
conversion factor to radians as part of the input:

$$\text{SIN}(\text{~20~} \times \ \pi\  \div \text{~180~)~ENTER}$$
:::

:::: {#fs-id1332638 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Evaluate sin( π 3 ).

approximately 0.866025403
::::

# Identifying the Domain and Range of Sine and Cosine Functions {#fs-id2482888}

Now that we can find the sine and cosine of an angle, we need to discuss
their domains and ranges. What are the domains of the sine and cosine
functions? That is, what are the smallest and largest numbers that can
be inputs of the functions? Because angles smaller than 0 and angles
larger than 2π can still be graphed on the unit circle and have real
values of x,y, and r, there is no lower or upper limit to the angles
that can be inputs to the sine and cosine functions. The input to the
sine and cosine functions is the rotation from the positive *x*-axis,
and that may be any real number.

What are the ranges of the sine and cosine functions? What are the least
and greatest possible values for their output? We can see the answers by
examining the unit circle, as shown in [\#](#). The bounds of the
*x*-coordinate are \[−1,1\]. The bounds of the *y*-coordinate are also
\[−1,1\]. Therefore, the range of both the sine and cosine functions is
\[−1,1\].

<figure id="Figure_07_03_013">

</figure>

# Finding Reference Angles {#fs-id1317676}

We have discussed finding the sine and cosine for angles in the first
quadrant, but what if our angle is in another quadrant? For any given
angle in the first quadrant, there is an angle in the second quadrant
with the same sine value. Because the sine value is the *y*-coordinate
on the unit circle, the other angle with the same sine will share the
same *y*-value, but have the opposite *x*-value. Therefore, its cosine
value will be the opposite of the first angle's cosine value.

Likewise, there will be an angle in the fourth quadrant with the same
cosine as the original angle. The angle with the same cosine will share
the same *x*-value but will have the opposite *y*-value. Therefore, its
sine value will be the opposite of the original angle's sine value.

As shown in [\#](#), angle α has the same sine value as angle t; the
cosine values are opposites. Angle β has the same cosine value as angle
t; the sine values are opposites.

$$\begin{array}{lcl}
{\sin(t) = \sin(\alpha)} & {\quad\text{and}\quad} & {\cos(t) = - \cos(\alpha)} \\
{\sin(t) = - \sin(\beta)} & {\quad\text{and}\quad} & {\cos(t) = \cos(\beta)}
\end{array}$$

<figure id="Figure_07_03_014">

</figure>

Recall that an angle's reference angle is the acute angle, t, formed by
the terminal side of the angle t and the horizontal axis. A reference
angle is always an angle between 0 and 90°, or 0 and π 2 radians. As we
can see from [\#](#), for any angle in quadrants II, III, or IV, there
is a reference angle in quadrant I.

<figure id="Figure_07_03_020">

</figure>

:::: {#fs-id1683797 .note}
::: title
:::

How To

*Given an angle between 0 and 2π, find its reference angle.*

An angle in the first quadrant is its own reference angle.

For an angle in the second or third quadrant, the reference angle is

\|

π

−

t

\|

or

\|

180°

−

t

\|

.

For an angle in the fourth quadrant, the reference angle is

2

π

−

t

or

360°

−

t

.

If an angle is less than

0

or greater than

2

π

,

add or subtract

2

π

as many times as needed to find an equivalent angle between

0

and

2

π

.
::::

::: {#Example_07_03_05 .example}
Find the reference angle of 225° as shown in [\#](#).

<figure id="Figure_07_03_016">

</figure>

Because 225° is in the third quadrant, the reference angle is

$$\left| \left( {180{^\circ} - 225{^\circ}} \right) \right| = \left| {- 45{^\circ}} \right| = 45{^\circ}$$
:::

:::: {#fs-id2454058 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Find the reference angle of 5π 3 .

π 3
::::

# Using Reference Angles {#fs-id1855384}

Now let's take a moment to reconsider the Ferris wheel introduced at the
beginning of this section. Suppose a rider snaps a photograph while
stopped twenty feet above ground level. The rider then rotates
three-quarters of the way around the circle. What is the rider's new
elevation? To answer questions such as this one, we need to evaluate the
sine or cosine functions at angles that are greater than 90 degrees or
at a negative angle. Reference angles make it possible to evaluate
trigonometric functions for angles outside the first quadrant. They can
also be used to find ( x,y ) coordinates for those angles. We will use
the reference angle of the angle of rotation combined with the quadrant
in which the terminal side of the angle lies.

## Using Reference Angles to Evaluate Trigonometric Functions {#fs-id1791875}

We can find the cosine and sine of any angle in any quadrant if we know
the cosine or sine of its reference angle. The absolute values of the
cosine and sine of an angle are the same as those of the reference
angle. The sign depends on the quadrant of the original angle. The
cosine will be positive or negative depending on the sign of the
*x*-values in that quadrant. The sine will be positive or negative
depending on the sign of the *y*-values in that quadrant.

:::: {#fs-id2673706 .note}
::: title
Using Reference Angles to Find Cosine and Sine
:::

Angles have cosines and sines with the same absolute value as their
reference angles. The sign (positive or negative) can be determined from
the quadrant of the angle.
::::

:::: {#fs-id2660231 .note}
::: title
:::

How To

*Given an angle in standard position, find the reference angle, and the
cosine and sine of the original angle.*

Measure the angle between the terminal side of the given angle and the
horizontal axis. That is the reference angle.

Determine the values of the cosine and sine of the reference angle.

Give the cosine the same sign as the

x

-values in the quadrant of the original angle.

Give the sine the same sign as the

y

-values in the quadrant of the original angle.
::::

::: {#Example_07_03_06 .example}
ⓐ

Using a reference angle, find the exact value of

cos

(

150°

)

and

sin

(

150°

)

.

ⓑ

Using the reference angle, find

cos

5

π

4

and

sin

5

π

4

.

ⓐ

150°

is located in the second quadrant. The angle it makes with the

x

-axis is

180°

−

150°

=

30°

,

so the reference angle is

30°

.

This tells us that 150° has the same sine and cosine values as 30°,
except for the sign.

$$\begin{matrix}
{\cos(30{^\circ}) = \frac{\sqrt{3}}{2}} & {\quad\text{and}\quad} & {\sin(30{^\circ}) = \frac{1}{2}}
\end{matrix}$$

Since 150° is in the second quadrant, the *x*-coordinate of the point on
the circle is negative, so the cosine value is negative. The
*y*-coordinate is positive, so the sine value is positive.

$$\begin{matrix}
{\cos(150{^\circ}) = - \frac{\sqrt{3}}{2}} & {\quad\text{and}\quad} & {\sin(150{^\circ}) = \frac{1}{2}}
\end{matrix}$$

ⓑ

5

π

4

is in the third quadrant. Its reference angle is

5

π

4

−

π

=

π

4

.

The cosine and sine of

π

4

are both

2

2

.

In the third quadrant, both

x

and

y

are negative, so:

$$\begin{matrix}
{\cos\mspace{1mu}\frac{5\pi}{4} = - \frac{\sqrt{2}}{2}} & {\quad\text{and}\quad} & {\sin\mspace{1mu}\frac{5\pi}{4} = - \frac{\sqrt{2}}{2}}
\end{matrix}$$
:::

:::: {#fs-id2262383 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

ⓐ

Use the reference angle of

315°

to find

cos

(

315°

)

and

sin

(

315°

)

.

ⓑ

Use the reference angle of

−

π

6

to find

cos

(

−

π

6

)

and

sin

(

−

π

6

)

.

ⓐ

cos

(

315°

)

=

2

2

,

sin

(

315°

)

=

--

2

2

ⓑ

cos

(

−

π

6

)

=

3

2

,

sin

(

−

π

6

)

=

−

1

2
::::

## Using Reference Angles to Find Coordinates {#fs-id2200656}

Now that we have learned how to find the cosine and sine values for
special angles in the first quadrant, we can use symmetry and reference
angles to fill in cosine and sine values for the rest of the special
angles on the unit circle. They are shown in [\#](#). Take time to learn
the (x,y) coordinates of all of the major angles in the first quadrant.

<figure id="Figure_07_03_017">

</figure>

In addition to learning the values for special angles, we can use
reference angles to find ( x,y ) coordinates of any point on the unit
circle, using what we know of reference angles along with the identities

$$\begin{array}{l}
{x = \text{cos~}t} \\
{y = \text{sin~}t}
\end{array}$$

First we find the reference angle corresponding to the given angle. Then
we take the sine and cosine values of the reference angle, and give them
the signs corresponding to the *y*- and *x*-values of the quadrant.

:::: {#fs-id2394842 .note}
::: title
:::

How To

*Given the angle of a point on a circle and the radius of the circle,
find the ( x,y ) coordinates of the point.*

Find the reference angle by measuring the smallest angle to the

x

-axis.

Find the cosine and sine of the reference angle.

Determine the appropriate signs for

x

and

y

in the given quadrant.
::::

::: {#Example_07_03_07 .example}
Find the coordinates of the point on the unit circle at an angle of 7π 6
.

We know that the angle 7π 6 is in the third quadrant.

First, let's find the reference angle by measuring the angle to the
*x*-axis. To find the reference angle of an angle whose terminal side is
in quadrant III, we find the difference of the angle and π.

$$\frac{7\pi}{6} - \pi = \frac{\pi}{6}$$

Next, we will find the cosine and sine of the reference angle.

$$\begin{array}{ll}
{\cos\left( \frac{\pi}{6} \right) = \frac{\sqrt{3}}{2}} & {\quad\sin\left( \frac{\pi}{6} \right) = \frac{1}{2}}
\end{array}$$

We must determine the appropriate signs for *x* and *y* in the given
quadrant. Because our original angle is in the third quadrant, where
both x and y are negative, both cosine and sine are negative.

$$\begin{array}{rcl}
{\cos\left( \frac{7\pi}{6} \right)} & = & {- \frac{\sqrt{3}}{2}} \\
{\sin\left( \frac{7\pi}{6} \right)} & = & {- \frac{1}{2}}
\end{array}$$

Now we can calculate the ( x,y ) coordinates using the identities x=cosθ
and y=sinθ.

The coordinates of the point are ( − 3 2 ,− 1 2 ) on the unit circle.
:::

:::: {#fs-id2371373 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Find the coordinates of the point on the unit circle at an angle of 5π 3
.

( 1 2 ,− 3 2 )
::::

:::: {#fs-id2202031 .note}
::: title
:::

Media

Access these online resources for additional instruction and practice
with sine and cosine functions.

Trigonometric Functions Using the Unit Circle

Sine and Cosine from the Unit

Sine and Cosine from the Unit Circle and Multiples of Pi Divided by Six

Sine and Cosine from the Unit Circle and Multiples of Pi Divided by Four

Trigonometric Functions Using Reference Angles
::::

# Key Equations {#fs-id1432642}

  ---------------------- --------------------
  Cosine                 cost=x
  Sine                   sint=y
  Pythagorean Identity   cos 2 t+ sin 2 t=1
  ---------------------- --------------------

# Key Concepts {#fs-id2084558}

Finding the function values for the sine and cosine begins with drawing
a unit circle, which is centered at the origin and has a radius of 1
unit.

Using the unit circle, the sine of an angle

t

equals the

y

-value of the endpoint on the unit circle of an arc of length

t

whereas the cosine of an angle

t

equals the

x

-value of the endpoint. See

.

The sine and cosine values are most directly determined when the
corresponding point on the unit circle falls on an axis. See

.

When the sine or cosine is known, we can use the Pythagorean Identity to
find the other. The Pythagorean Identity is also useful for determining
the sines and cosines of special angles. See

.

Calculators and graphing software are helpful for finding sines and
cosines if the proper procedure for entering information is known. See

.

The domain of the sine and cosine functions is all real numbers.

The range of both the sine and cosine functions is

\[

−1

,

1

\]

.

The sine and cosine of an angle have the same absolute value as the sine
and cosine of its reference angle.

The signs of the sine and cosine are determined from the

x

\- and

y

-values in the quadrant of the original angle.

An angle's reference angle is the size angle,

t

,

formed by the terminal side of the angle

t

and the horizontal axis. See

.

Reference angles can be used to find the sine and cosine of the original
angle. See

.

Reference angles can also be used to find the coordinates of a point on
a circle. See

.

# Section Exercises {#fs-id2262404}

## Verbal {#fs-id2262410}

Describe the unit circle.

The unit circle is a circle of radius 1 centered at the origin.

What do the *x-* and *y-*coordinates of the points on the unit circle
represent?

Discuss the difference between a coterminal angle and a reference angle.

Coterminal angles are angles that share the same terminal side. A
reference angle is the size of the smallest acute angle, t, formed by
the terminal side of the angle t and the horizontal axis.

Explain how the cosine of an angle in the second quadrant differs from
the cosine of its reference angle in the unit circle.

Explain how the sine of an angle in the second quadrant differs from the
sine of its reference angle in the unit circle.

The sine values are equal.

## Algebraic {#fs-id1629229}

For the following exercises, use the given sign of the sine and cosine
functions to find the quadrant in which the terminal point determined by
t lies.

sin(t)\<0 and cos(t)\<0

sin(t)\>0 and cos(t)\>0

I

sin(t)\>0 and cos(t)\<0

sin(t)\<0 and cos(t)\>0

IV

For the following exercises, find the exact value of each trigonometric
function.

sin π 2

sin π 3

3 2

cos π 2

cos π 3

1 2

sin π 4

cos π 4

2 2

sin π 6

sinπ

0

sin 3π 2

cosπ

-1

cos0

cos π 6

3 2

sin0

## Numeric {#fs-id1618907}

For the following exercises, state the reference angle for the given
angle.

240°

60°

−170°

100°

80°

−315°

135°

45°

5π 4

2π 3

π 3

5π 6

−11π 3

π 3

−7π 4

−π 8

π 8

For the following exercises, find the reference angle, the quadrant of
the terminal side, and the sine and cosine of each angle. If the angle
is not one of the angles on the unit circle, use a calculator and round
to three decimal places.

225°

300°

60°, Quadrant IV, sin(300°)=− 3 2 ,cos(300°)= 1 2

320°

135°

45°, Quadrant II, sin( 135° )= 2 2 ,cos(135°)=− 2 2

210°

120°

60°, Quadrant II, sin( 120° )= 3 2 ,cos(120°)=− 1 2

250°

150°

30°, Quadrant II, sin( 150° )= 1 2 ,cos(150°)=− 3 2

5π 4

7π 6

π 6 , Quadrant III, sin( 7π 6 )=− 1 2 ,cos( 7π 6 )=− 3 2

5π 3

3π 4

π 4 , Quadrant II, sin( 3π 4 )= 2 2 ,cos( 3π 4 )=− 2 2

4π 3

2π 3

π 3 , Quadrant II, sin( 2π 3 )= 3 2 ,cos( 2π 3 )=− 1 2

5π 6

7π 4

π 4 , Quadrant IV, sin( 7π 4 )=− 2 2 ,cos( 7π 4 )= 2 2

For the following exercises, find the requested value.

If cos( t )= 1 7 and t is in the fourth quadrant, find sin(t).

If cos( t )= 2 9 and t is in the first quadrant, find sin(t).

77 9

If sin( t )= 3 8 and t is in the second quadrant, find cos(t).

If sin( t )=− 1 4 and t is in the third quadrant, find cos(t).

− 15 4

Find the coordinates of the point on a circle with radius 15
corresponding to an angle of 220°.

Find the coordinates of the point on a circle with radius 20
corresponding to an angle of 120°.

( −10,10 3 )

Find the coordinates of the point on a circle with radius 8
corresponding to an angle of 7π 4 .

Find the coordinates of the point on a circle with radius 16
corresponding to an angle of 5π 9 .

( --2.778, 15.757 )

State the domain of the sine and cosine functions.

State the range of the sine and cosine functions.

\[ --1, 1 \]

## Graphical {#fs-id2568826}

For the following exercises, use the given point on the unit circle to
find the value of the sine and cosine of t.

sint= 1 2 ,cost=− 3 2

sint=− 2 2 ,cost=− 2 2

sint= 3 2 ,cost=− 1 2

sint=− 2 2 ,cost= 2 2

sint=0,cost=−1

sint=−0.596,cost=0.803

sint= 1 2 ,cost= 3 2

sint=− 1 2 ,cost= 3 2

sint=0.761,cost=−0.649

sint=1,cost=0

## Technology {#fs-id1855452}

For the following exercises, use a graphing calculator to evaluate.

sin 5π 9

cos 5π 9

−0.1736

sin π 10

cos π 10

0.9511

sin 3π 4

cos 3π 4

−0.7071

sin98°

cos98°

−0.1392

cos310°

sin310°

−0.7660

## Extensions {#fs-id2497793}

For the following exercises, evaluate.

sin( 11π 3 )cos( −5π 6 )

sin( 3π 4 )cos( 5π 3 )

2 4

sin( − 4π 3 )cos( π 2 )

sin( −9π 4 )cos( −π 6 )

− 6 4

sin( π 6 )cos( −π 3 )

sin( 7π 4 )cos( −2π 3 )

2 4

cos( 5π 6 )cos( 2π 3 )

cos( −π 3 )cos( π 4 )

2 4

sin( −5π 4 )sin( 11π 6 )

sin( π )sin( π 6 )

0

## Real-World Applications {#fs-id2245131}

For the following exercises, use this scenario: A child enters a
carousel that takes one minute to revolve once around. The child enters
at the point (0,1), that is, on the due north position. Assume the
carousel revolves counter clockwise.

What are the coordinates of the child after 45 seconds?

What are the coordinates of the child after 90 seconds?

( 0,--1 )

What are the coordinates of the child after 125 seconds?

When will the child have coordinates (0.707,--0.707) if the ride lasts 6
minutes? (There are multiple answers.)

37.5 seconds, 97.5 seconds, 157.5 seconds, 217.5 seconds, 277.5 seconds,
337.5 seconds

When will the child have coordinates ( --0.866,--0.5 ) if the ride lasts
6 minutes?

# 

cosine function

the

x

-value of the point on a unit circle corresponding to a given angle

Pythagorean Identity

a corollary of the Pythagorean Theorem stating that the square of the
cosine of a given angle plus the square of the sine of that angle equals
1

sine function

the

y

-value of the point on a unit circle corresponding to a given angle
