m51286

> In this section you will:
>
> Find exact values of the trigonometric functions secant, cosecant,
> tangent, and cotangent of
>
> π
>
> 3
>
> ,
>
> π
>
> 4
>
> ,
>
> and
>
> π
>
> 6
>
> .
>
> Use reference angles to evaluate the trigonometric functions secant,
> tangent, and cotangent.
>
> Use properties of even and odd trigonometric functions.
>
> Recognize and use fundamental identities.
>
> Evaluate trigonometric functions with a calculator.

b54b5f27-aab0-4016-aeed-89f67f2b18e8

A wheelchair ramp that meets the standards of the Americans with
Disabilities Act must make an angle with the ground whose tangent is 1
12 or less, regardless of its length. A tangent represents a ratio, so
this means that for every 1 inch of rise, the ramp must have 12 inches
of run. Trigonometric functions allow us to specify the shapes and
proportions of objects independent of exact dimensions. We have already
defined the sine and cosine functions of an angle. Though sine and
cosine are the trigonometric functions most often used, there are four
others. Together they make up the set of six trigonometric functions. In
this section, we will investigate the remaining functions.

# Finding Exact Values of the Trigonometric Functions Secant, Cosecant, Tangent, and Cotangent {#fs-id2194087}

We can also define the remaining functions in terms of the unit circle
with a point ( x,y ) corresponding to an angle of t, as shown in
[\#](#). As with the sine and cosine, we can use the ( x,y ) coordinates
to find the other functions.

<figure id="Figure_07_04_001">

</figure>

The first function we will define is the tangent. The tangent of an
angle is the ratio of the *y*-value to the *x*-value of the
corresponding point on the unit circle. In [\#](#), the tangent of angle
t is equal to y x ,x≠0. Because the *y*-value is equal to the sine of t,
and the *x*-value is equal to the cosine of t, the tangent of angle t
can also be defined as sint cost ,cost≠0. The tangent function is
abbreviated as tan. The remaining three functions can all be expressed
as reciprocals of functions we have already defined.

The

secant

function is the reciprocal of the cosine function. In

, the secant of angle

t

is equal to

1

cos

t

=

1

x

,

x

≠

0\.

The secant function is abbreviated as

sec

.

The

cotangent

function is the reciprocal of the tangent function. In

, the cotangent of angle

t

is equal to

cos

t

sin

t

=

x

y

,

y

≠

0\.

The cotangent function is abbreviated as

cot

.

The

cosecant

function is the reciprocal of the sine function. In

, the cosecant of angle

t

is equal to

1

sin

t

=

1

y

,

y

≠

0\.

The cosecant function is abbreviated as

csc

.

:::: {#fs-id2216458 .note}
::: title
Tangent, Secant, Cosecant, and Cotangent Functions
:::

If t is a real number and (x,y) is a point where the terminal side of an
angle of t radians intercepts the unit circle, then

$$\begin{matrix}
{\text{tan~}t} & = & {\frac{y}{x},x \neq 0} \\
{\text{sec~}t} & = & {\frac{1}{x},x \neq 0} \\
{\text{csc~}t} & = & {\frac{1}{y},y \neq 0} \\
{\text{cot~}t} & = & {\frac{x}{y},y \neq 0}
\end{matrix}$$
::::

::: {#Example_07_04_01 .example}
The point ( − 3 2 , 1 2 ) is on the unit circle, as shown in [\#](#).
Find sint,cost,tant,sect,csct, and cott.

<figure id="Figure_07_04_002">

</figure>

Because we know the (x,y) coordinates of the point on the unit circle
indicated by angle t, we can use those coordinates to find the six
functions:

$$\begin{array}{rllccc}
{\text{sin~}t} & {= y} & {= \frac{1}{2}} & & & \\
{\text{cos~}t} & {= x} & {= - \frac{\sqrt{3}}{2}} & & & \\
{\text{tan~}t} & {= \frac{y}{x}} & {= \frac{\frac{1}{2}}{- \frac{\sqrt{3}}{2}}} & {= \frac{1}{2}\left( {- \frac{2}{\sqrt{3}}} \right)} & {= - \frac{1}{\sqrt{3}}} & {= - \frac{\sqrt{3}}{3}} \\
{\text{sec~}t} & {= \frac{1}{x}} & {= \frac{1}{- \frac{\sqrt{3}}{2}}} & {= - \frac{2}{\sqrt{3}}} & {= - \frac{2\sqrt{3}}{3}} & \\
{\text{csc~}t} & {= \frac{1}{y}} & {= \frac{1}{\frac{1}{2}}} & {= 2} & & \\
{\text{cot~}t} & {= \frac{x}{y}} & {= \frac{- \frac{\sqrt{3}}{2}}{\frac{1}{2}}} & {= - \frac{\sqrt{3}}{2}\left( \frac{2}{1} \right)} & {= - \sqrt{3}} & 
\end{array}$$
:::

:::: {#fs-id1841637 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

The point ( 2 2 ,− 2 2 ) is on the unit circle, as shown in [\#](#).
Find sint,cost,tant,sect,csct, and cott.

<figure id="Figure_07_02_003">

</figure>

sint=− 2 2 cost= 2 2 ,tant=−1,sect= 2 ,csct=− 2 ,cott=−1
::::

::: {#Example_07_04_02 .example}
Find sint,cost,tant,sect,csct, and cott. when t= π 6 .

We have previously used the properties of equilateral triangles to
demonstrate that sin π 6 = 1 2 and cos π 6 = 3 2 . We can use these
values and the definitions of tangent, secant, cosecant, and cotangent
as functions of sine and cosine to find the remaining function values.

$$\begin{array}{clcc}
{\text{tan}\;\frac{\pi}{6}} & {= \frac{\text{sin}\;\frac{\pi}{6}}{\text{cos}\;\frac{\pi}{6}}} & & \\
 & {= \frac{\frac{1}{2}}{\frac{\sqrt{3}}{2}}} & {= \frac{1}{\sqrt{3}}} & {= \frac{\sqrt{3}}{3}} \\
{\text{sec}\;\frac{\pi}{6}} & {= \frac{1}{\text{cos}\;\frac{\pi}{6}}} & & \\
 & {= \frac{1}{\frac{\sqrt{3}}{2}}} & {= \frac{2}{\sqrt{3}}} & {= \frac{2\sqrt{3}}{3}} \\
{\csc\;\frac{\pi}{6}} & {= \frac{1}{\sin\;\frac{\pi}{6}}} & {= \frac{1}{\frac{1}{2}}} & {= 2} \\
{\text{cot}\;\frac{\pi}{6}} & {= \frac{\text{cos}\;\frac{\pi}{6}}{\text{sin}\;\frac{\pi}{6}}} & & \\
 & {= \frac{\frac{\sqrt{3}}{2}}{\frac{1}{2}}} & {= \sqrt{3}} & 
\end{array}$$
:::

:::: {#fs-id1828995 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Find sint,cost,tant,sect,csct, and cott. when t= π 3 .

sinπ3=32,cosπ3=12,tanπ3=3,secπ3=2,cscπ3=233,cotπ3=33
::::

Because we know the sine and cosine values for the common first-quadrant
angles, we can find the other function values for those angles as well
by setting x equal to the cosine and y equal to the sine and then using
the definitions of tangent, secant, cosecant, and cotangent. The results
are shown in [\#](#).

      Angle          0       π 6 ,or 30°   π 4 ,or 45°   π 3 ,or 60°   π 2 ,or 90°
  ------------- ----------- ------------- ------------- ------------- -------------
    *Cosine*         1           3 2           2 2           1 2            0
     *Sine*          0           1 2           2 2           3 2            1
    *Tangent*        0           3 3            1             3         Undefined
    *Secant*         1          2 3 3           2             2         Undefined
   *Cosecant*    Undefined        2             2           2 3 3           1
   *Cotangent*   Undefined        3             1            3 3            0

# Using Reference Angles to Evaluate Tangent, Secant, Cosecant, and Cotangent {#fs-id1615539}

We can evaluate trigonometric functions of angles outside the first
quadrant using reference angles as we have already done with the sine
and cosine functions. The procedure is the same: Find the reference
angle formed by the terminal side of the given angle with the horizontal
axis. The trigonometric function values for the original angle will be
the same as those for the reference angle, except for the positive or
negative sign, which is determined by *x*- and *y*-values in the
original quadrant. [\#](#) shows which functions are positive in which
quadrant.

To help remember which of the six trigonometric functions are positive
in each quadrant, we can use the mnemonic phrase "A Smart Trig Class."
Each of the four words in the phrase corresponds to one of the four
quadrants, starting with quadrant I and rotating counterclockwise. In
quadrant I, which is "*A*," all of the six trigonometric functions are
positive. In quadrant II, "*S*mart," only sine and its reciprocal
function, cosecant, are positive. In quadrant III, "*T*rig," only
tangent and its reciprocal function, cotangent, are positive. Finally,
in quadrant IV, "*C*lass," only cosine and its reciprocal function,
secant, are positive.

<figure id="Figure_07_04_004">

</figure>

:::: {#fs-id1476281 .note}
::: title
:::

How To

*Given an angle not in the first quadrant, use reference angles to find
all six trigonometric functions.*

Measure the angle formed by the terminal side of the given angle and the
horizontal axis. This is the reference angle.

Evaluate the function at the reference angle.

Observe the quadrant where the terminal side of the original angle is
located. Based on the quadrant, determine whether the output is positive
or negative.
::::

::: {#Example_07_04_03 .example}
Use reference angles to find all six trigonometric functions of − 5π 6 .

The angle between this angle's terminal side and the *x*-axis is π 6 ,
so that is the reference angle. Since − 5π 6 is in the third quadrant,
where both x and y are negative, cosine, sine, secant, and cosecant will
be negative, while tangent and cotangent will be positive.

cos( − 5π 6 ) =− 3 2 ,sin( − 5π 6 ) =− 1 2 ,tan( − 5π 6 ) = 3 3 , sec( −
5π 6 ) =− 2 3 3 ,csc( − 5π 6 ) =−2,cot( − 5π 6 ) = 3
:::

:::: {#fs-id1676954 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Use reference angles to find all six trigonometric functions of − 7π 4 .

sin( −7π 4 )= 2 2 ,cos( −7π 4 )= 2 2 ,tan( −7π 4 )=1, sec( −7π 4 )= 2
,csc( −7π 4 )= 2 ,cot( −7π 4 )=1
::::

# Using Even and Odd Trigonometric Functions {#fs-id2134771}

To be able to use our six trigonometric functions freely with both
positive and negative angle inputs, we should examine how each function
treats a negative input. As it turns out, there is an important
difference among the functions in this regard.

Consider the function f(x)= x 2 , shown in [\#](#). The graph of the
function is symmetrical about the *y*-axis. All along the curve, any two
points with opposite *x*-values have the same function value. This
matches the result of calculation: (4) 2 = (−4) 2 , (−5) 2 = (5) 2 , and
so on. So f(x)= x 2 is an even function, a function such that two inputs
that are opposites have the same output. That means f( −x )=f( x ).

<figure id="Figure_07_04_005">

</figure>

Now consider the function f(x)= x 3 , shown in [\#](#). The graph is not
symmetrical about the *y*-axis. All along the graph, any two points with
opposite *x*-values also have opposite *y*-values. So f(x)= x 3 is an
odd function, one such that two inputs that are opposites have outputs
that are also opposites. That means f( −x )=−f( x ).

<figure id="Figure_07_04_006">

</figure>

We can test whether a trigonometric function is even or odd by drawing a
unit circle with a positive and a negative angle, as in [\#](#). The
sine of the positive angle is y. The sine of the negative angle is −y.
The sine function, then, is an odd function. We can test each of the six
trigonometric functions in this fashion. The results are shown in
[\#](#).

<figure id="Figure_07_04_007">

</figure>

  ------------------------------------------- -------------------------------------------- ----------------------------------------------
  sin t = y sin(−t) = −y sin t ≠ sin(−t)      cos t = x cos(−t) = x cos t = cos(−t)        tan(t) = y x tan(−t) = − y x tan t ≠ tan(−t)
  sec t = 1 x sec(−t) = 1 x sec t = sec(−t)   csc t = 1 y csc(−t) = 1 −y csc t ≠ csc(−t)   cot t = x y cot(−t) = x −y cot t ≠ cot(−t)
  ------------------------------------------- -------------------------------------------- ----------------------------------------------

:::: {#fs-id2464639 .note}
::: title
Even and Odd Trigonometric Functions
:::

An even function is one in which f(−x)=f(x).

An odd function is one in which f(−x)=−f(x).

Cosine and secant are even:

$$\begin{matrix}
{\cos(-t)} & = & {\text{cos~}t} \\
{\sec(-t)} & = & {\text{sec~}t}
\end{matrix}$$

Sine, tangent, cosecant, and cotangent are odd:

$$\begin{array}{rcl}
{\text{sin}(-t)} & = & {- \text{sin~}t} \\
{\text{tan}(-t)} & = & {- \text{tan~}t} \\
{\text{csc}(-t)} & = & {- \text{csc~}t} \\
{\text{cot}(-t)} & = & {- \text{cot~}t}
\end{array}$$
::::

::: {#Example_07_04_04 .example}
If the secant of angle t is 2, what is the secant of −t?

Secant is an even function. The secant of an angle is the same as the
secant of its opposite. So if the secant of angle t is 2, the secant of
−t is also 2.
:::

:::: {#fs-id2489286 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

If the cotangent of angle t is 3 , what is the cotangent of −t?

− 3
::::

# Recognizing and Using Fundamental Identities {#fs-id1609679}

We have explored a number of properties of trigonometric functions. Now,
we can take the relationships a step further, and derive some
fundamental identities. Identities are statements that are true for all
values of the input on which they are defined. Usually, identities can
be derived from definitions and relationships we already know. For
example, the Pythagorean Identity we learned earlier was derived from
the Pythagorean Theorem and the definitions of sine and cosine.

:::: {#fs-id2211168 .note}
::: title
Fundamental Identities
:::

A General Noter

We can derive some useful identities from the six trigonometric
functions. The other four trigonometric functions can be related back to
the sine and cosine functions using these basic relationships:

$$\tan\; t = \frac{\sin\; t}{\cos\; t}$$

$$\sec\; t = \frac{1}{\cos\; t}$$

$$\csc\; t = \frac{1}{\sin\; t}$$

$$\text{cot}\; t = \frac{1}{\text{tan}\; t} = \frac{\text{cos}\; t}{\text{sin}\; t}$$
::::

::: {#Example_07_04_05 .example}
ⓐ

Given

sin

(

45°

)

=

2

2

,

cos

(

45°

)

=

2

2

,

evaluate

tan

(

45°

)

.

ⓑ

Given

sin

(

5

π

6

)

=

1

2

,

cos

(

5

π

6

)

=

−

3

2

,

evaluate

sec

(

5

π

6

)

.

Because we know the sine and cosine values for these angles, we can use
identities to evaluate the other functions.

ⓐ

tan

(

45°

)

=

sin

(

45°

)

cos

(

45°

)

=

2

2

2

2

=

1

ⓑ

sec

(

5

π

6

)

=

1

cos

(

5

π

6

)

=

1

−

3

2

=

−2

3

1

=

−2

3

=

−

2

3

3
:::

:::: {#fs-id2382454 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Evaluate csc( 7π 6 ).

−2
::::

::: {#Example_07_04_06 .example}
Simplify sect tant .

We can simplify this by rewriting both functions in terms of sine and
cosine.

$$\begin{array}{cclc}
\frac{\text{sec~}t}{\text{tan~}t} & = & \frac{\frac{1}{\text{cos~}t}}{\frac{\text{sin~}t}{\text{cos~}t}} & \\
 & = & {\frac{1}{\text{cos~}t} \cdot \frac{\text{cos~}t}{\text{sin~}t}} & {\qquad\text{Multiply~by~the~reciprocal}.} \\
 & = & {\frac{1}{\text{sin~}t} = \text{csc~}t} & {\qquad\text{Simplify~and~use~the~identity}.}
\end{array}$$

By showing that sect tant can be simplified to csct, we have, in fact,
established a new identity.

$$\frac{\sec\; t}{\tan\; t} = \csc\; t$$
:::

:::: {#fs-id1601420 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Simplify (tant)(cost).

sint
::::

## Alternate Forms of the Pythagorean Identity {#fs-id2811451}

We can use these fundamental identities to derive alternate forms of the
Pythagorean Identity, cos 2 t+ sin 2 t=1. One form is obtained by
dividing both sides by cos 2 t.

$$\begin{array}{rcl}
{\frac{\cos^{2}t}{\cos^{2}t} + \frac{\sin^{2}t}{\cos^{2}t}} & = & \frac{1}{\cos^{2}t} \\
{1 + \tan^{2}t} & = & {\sec^{2}t}
\end{array}$$

The other form is obtained by dividing both sides by sin 2 t.

$$\begin{array}{rcl}
{\frac{\cos^{2}t}{\sin^{2}t} + \frac{\sin^{2}t}{\sin^{2}t}} & = & \frac{1}{\sin^{2}t} \\
{\cot^{2}t + 1} & = & {\csc^{2}t}
\end{array}$$

:::: {#fs-id2041755 .note}
::: title
Alternate Forms of the Pythagorean Identity
:::

$$1 + \tan^{2}t = \sec^{2}t$$

$$\cot^{2}t + 1 = \csc^{2}t$$
::::

::: {#Example_07_04_07 .example}
If cos(t)= 12 13 and t is in quadrant IV, as shown in [\#](#), find the
values of the other five trigonometric functions.

<figure id="Figure_07_04_008">

</figure>

We can find the sine using the Pythagorean Identity, cos 2 t+ sin 2 t=1,
and the remaining functions by relating them to sine and cosine.

$$\begin{array}{rcl}
{\left( \frac{12}{13} \right)^{2} + \sin^{2}t} & = & 1 \\
{\sin^{2}t} & = & {1 - \left( \frac{12}{13} \right)^{2}} \\
{\sin^{2}t} & = & {1 - \frac{144}{169}} \\
{\sin^{2}t} & = & \frac{25}{169} \\
{\text{sin~}t} & = & {\pm \sqrt{\frac{25}{169}}} \\
{\text{sin~}t} & = & {\pm \frac{\sqrt{25}}{\sqrt{169}}} \\
{\text{sin~}t} & = & {\pm \frac{5}{13}}
\end{array}$$

The sign of the sine depends on the *y*-values in the quadrant where the
angle is located. Since the angle is in quadrant IV, where the
*y*-values are negative, its sine is negative, − 5 13 .

The remaining functions can be calculated using identities relating them
to sine and cosine.

$$\begin{array}{rlll}
{\text{tan~}t} & {= \frac{\text{sin~}t}{\text{cos~}t}} & {= \frac{- \frac{5}{13}}{\frac{12}{13}}} & {= - \frac{5}{12}} \\
{\text{sec~}t} & {= \frac{1}{\text{cos~}t}} & {= \frac{1}{\frac{12}{13}}} & {= \frac{13}{12}} \\
{\text{csc~}t} & {= \frac{1}{\text{sin~}t}} & {= \frac{1}{- \frac{5}{13}}} & {= \frac{- 13}{5}} \\
{\text{cot~}t} & {= \frac{1}{\text{tan~}t}} & {= \frac{1}{- \frac{5}{12}}} & {= - \frac{12}{5}}
\end{array}$$
:::

:::: {#fs-id2441325 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

If sec(t)=− 17 8 and 0\<t\<π, find the values of the other five
functions.

cost=− 8 17 ,sint= 15 17 ,tant=− 15 8 csct= 17 15 ,cott=− 8 15
::::

As we discussed at the beginning of the chapter, a function that repeats
its values in regular intervals is known as a periodic function. The
trigonometric functions are periodic. For the four trigonometric
functions, sine, cosine, cosecant and secant, a revolution of one
circle, or 2π, will result in the same outputs for these functions. And
for tangent and cotangent, only a half a revolution will result in the
same outputs.

Other functions can also be periodic. For example, the lengths of months
repeat every four years. If x represents the length time, measured in
years, and f(x) represents the number of days in February, then
f(x+4)=f(x). This pattern repeats over and over through time. In other
words, every four years (except for multiples of 100), February
typically has the same number of days as it did 4 years earlier. The
positive number 4 is the smallest positive number that satisfies this
condition and is called the period. A *period* is the shortest interval
over which a function completes one full cycle---in this example, the
period is 4 and represents the time it takes for us to be certain
February has the same number of days.

:::: {#fs-id2211792 .note}
::: title
Period of a Function
:::

The period P of a repeating function f is the number representing the
interval such that f(x+P)=f(x) for any value of x.

The period of the cosine, sine, secant, and cosecant functions is 2π.

The period of the tangent and cotangent functions is π.
::::

::: {#Example_07_04_08 .example}
Find the values of the six trigonometric functions of angle t based on
[\#](#)*.*

<figure id="Figure_07_04_009">

</figure>

$$\begin{array}{rllc}
{\text{sin~}t} & {= y} & {= - \frac{\sqrt{3}}{2}} & \\
{\text{cos~}t} & {= x} & {= - \frac{1}{2}} & \\
{\text{tan~}t} & {= \frac{\text{sin~}t}{\text{cos~}t}} & {= \frac{- \frac{\sqrt{3}}{2}}{- \frac{1}{2}}} & {= \sqrt{3}} \\
{\text{sec~}t} & {= \frac{1}{\text{cos~}t}} & {= \frac{1}{- \frac{1}{2}}} & {= -2} \\
{\text{csc~}t} & {= \frac{1}{\text{sin~}t}} & {= \frac{1}{- \frac{\sqrt{3}}{2}}} & {= - \frac{2\sqrt{3}}{3}} \\
{\text{cot~}t} & {= \frac{1}{\text{tan~}t}} & {= \frac{1}{\sqrt{3}}} & {= \frac{\sqrt{3}}{3}}
\end{array}$$
:::

:::: {#fs-id2562464 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Find the values of the six trigonometric functions of angle t based on
[\#](#).

<figure id="Figure_07_04_010">

</figure>

sint=−1,cost=0,tant=Undefined sect=Undefined,csct=−1,cott=0
::::

::: {#Example_07_04_09 .example}
If sin(t)=− 3 2 andcos(t)= 1 2 ,findsec(t),csc(t),tan(t),cot(t).

$$\begin{array}{rll}
{\text{sec~}t} & {= \frac{1}{\text{cos~}t}} & {= \frac{1}{\frac{1}{2}} = 2} \\
{\text{csc~}t} & {= \frac{1}{\text{sin~}t}} & {= \frac{1}{- \frac{\sqrt{3}}{2}} - \frac{2\sqrt{3}}{3}} \\
{\text{tan~}t} & {= \frac{\text{sin~}t}{\text{cos~}t}} & {= \frac{- \frac{\sqrt{3}}{2}}{\frac{1}{2}} = - \sqrt{3}} \\
{\text{cot~}t} & {= \frac{1}{\text{tan~}t}} & {= \frac{1}{- \sqrt{3}} = - \frac{\sqrt{3}}{3}}
\end{array}$$
:::

:::: {#fs-id2028568 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

sin(t)= 2 2 andcos(t)= 2 2 ,findsec(t),csc(t),tan(t),andcot(t)

sect= 2 ,csct= 2 ,tant=1,cott=1
::::

# Evaluating Trigonometric Functions with a Calculator {#fs-id2448894}

We have learned how to evaluate the six trigonometric functions for the
common first-quadrant angles and to use them as reference angles for
angles in other quadrants. To evaluate trigonometric functions of other
angles, we use a scientific or graphing calculator or computer software.
If the calculator has a degree mode and a radian mode, confirm the
correct mode is chosen before making a calculation.

Evaluating a tangent function with a scientific calculator as opposed to
a graphing calculator or computer algebra system is like evaluating a
sine or cosine: Enter the value and press the TAN key. For the
reciprocal functions, there may not be any dedicated keys that say CSC,
SEC, or COT. In that case, the function must be evaluated as the
reciprocal of a sine, cosine, or tangent.

If we need to work with degrees and our calculator or software does not
have a degree mode, we can enter the degrees multiplied by the
conversion factor π 180 to convert the degrees to radians. To find the
secant of 30°, we could press

$$\begin{matrix}
{\text{(for~a~scientific~calculator):}\;\frac{1}{30\; \times \;\frac{\pi}{180}}\;\text{COS}} \\
\text{or} \\
{\text{(for~a~graphing~calculator):}\;\frac{1}{\cos\left( \frac{30\pi}{180} \right)}}
\end{matrix}$$

:::: {#fs-id2077112 .note}
::: title
:::

How To

*Given an angle measure in radians, use a scientific calculator to find
the cosecant.*

If the calculator has degree mode and radian mode, set it to radian
mode.

Enter:

1

/

Enter the value of the angle inside parentheses.

Press the SIN key.

Press the = key.
::::

:::: {#fs-id1798807 .note}
::: title
:::

How To

*Given an angle measure in radians, use a graphing utility/calculator to
find the cosecant.*

If the graphing utility has degree mode and radian mode, set it to
radian mode.

Enter:

1

/

Press the SIN key.

Enter the value of the angle inside parentheses.

Press the ENTER key.
::::

::: {#Example_07_04_10 .example}
Evaluate the cosecant of 5π 7 .

For a scientific calculator, enter information as follows:

$$\begin{array}{rcc}
{1/(5\  \times \ \pi/7)\text{~SIN}} & = & \\
{\csc\left( \frac{5\pi}{7} \right)} & \approx & 1.279
\end{array}$$
:::

:::: {#fs-id1688309 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Evaluate the cotangent of − π 8 .

≈−2.414
::::

:::: {#fs-id2477435 .note}
::: title
:::

Media

Access these online resources for additional instruction and practice
with other trigonometric functions.

Determing Trig Function Values

More Examples of Determining Trig Functions

Pythagorean Identities

Trig Functions on a Calculator
::::

## Key Equations {#fs-id2040625}

  -------------------- --------------------------
  Tangent function     tant= sint cost
  Secant function      sect= 1 cost
  Cosecant function    csct= 1 sint
  Cotangent function   cott= 1 tant = cost sint
  -------------------- --------------------------

# Key Concepts {#fs-id2183192}

The tangent of an angle is the ratio of the

y

-value to the

x

-value of the corresponding point on the unit circle.

The secant, cotangent, and cosecant are all reciprocals of other
functions. The secant is the reciprocal of the cosine function, the
cotangent is the reciprocal of the tangent function, and the cosecant is
the reciprocal of the sine function.

The six trigonometric functions can be found from a point on the unit
circle. See

.

Trigonometric functions can also be found from an angle. See

.

Trigonometric functions of angles outside the first quadrant can be
determined using reference angles. See

.

A function is said to be even if

f

(

−

x

)

=

f

(

x

)

and odd if

f

(

−

x

)

=

−

f

(

x

)

for all

x

in the domain of

f\.

Cosine and secant are even; sine, tangent, cosecant, and cotangent are
odd.

Even and odd properties can be used to evaluate trigonometric functions.
See

.

The Pythagorean Identity makes it possible to find a cosine from a sine
or a sine from a cosine.

Identities can be used to evaluate trigonometric functions. See

and

.

Fundamental identities such as the Pythagorean Identity can be
manipulated algebraically to produce new identities. See

.

The trigonometric functions repeat at regular intervals.

The period

P

of a repeating function

f

is the smallest interval such that

f

(

x

\+

P

)

=

f

(

x

)

for any value of

x

.

The values of trigonometric functions can be found by mathematical
analysis. See

and

.

To evaluate trigonometric functions of other angles, we can use a
calculator or computer software. See

.

# Section Exercises {#fs-id2800161}

## Verbal {#fs-id2800164}

On an interval of \[ 0,2π ), can the sine and cosine values of a radian
measure ever be equal? If so, where?

Yes, when the reference angle is π 4 and the terminal side of the angle
is in quadrants I and III. Thus, a x= π 4 , 5π 4 , the sine and cosine
values are equal.

What would you estimate the cosine of π degrees to be? Explain your
reasoning.

For any angle in quadrant II, if you knew the sine of the angle, how
could you determine the cosine of the angle?

Substitute the sine of the angle in for y in the Pythagorean Theorem x
2 + y 2 =1. Solve for x and take the negative solution.

Describe the secant function.

Tangent and cotangent have a period of π. What does this tell us about
the output of these functions?

The outputs of tangent and cotangent will repeat every π units.

## Algebraic {#fs-id2164209}

For the following exercises, find the exact value of each expression.

tan π 6

sec π 6

2 3 3

csc π 6

cot π 6

3

tan π 4

sec π 4

2

csc π 4

cot π 4

1

tan π 3

sec π 3

2

csc π 3

cot π 3

3 3

For the following exercises, use reference angles to evaluate the
expression.

tan 5π 6

sec 7π 6

− 2 3 3

csc 11π 6

cot 13π 6

3

tan 7π 4

sec 3π 4

− 2

csc 5π 4

cot 11π 4

--1

tan 8π 3

sec 4π 3

-2

csc 2π 3

cot 5π 3

− 3 3

tan225°

sec300°

2

csc150°

cot240°

3 3

tan330°

sec120°

--2

csc210°

cot315°

--1

If sint= 3 4 , and t is in quadrant II, find cost,sect,csct,tant, and
cott.

If cost=− 1 3 , and t is in quadrant III, find sint,sect,csct,tant, and
cott.

sint=− 2 2 3 , sect=−3, csct=− 3 2 4 , tant=2 2 , cott= 2 4

If tant= 12 5 , and 0≤t\< π 2 , find sint,cost,sect,csct,andcott.

If sint= 3 2 and cost= 1 2 , find sect,csct,tant, and cott.

sect=2, csct= 2 3 3 , tant= 3 , cott= 3 3

If sin40°≈0.643 and cos40°≈0.766, find sec40°,csc40°,tan40°, and cot40°.

If sint= 2 2 , what is the sin(−t)?

− 2 2

If cost= 1 2 , what is the cos(−t)?

If sect=3.1, what is the sec(−t)?

3.1

If csct=0.34, what is the csc(−t)?

If tant=−1.4, what is the tan(−t)?

1.4

If cott=9.23, what is the cot(−t)?

## Graphical {#fs-id1677395}

For the following exercises, use the angle in the unit circle to find
the value of the each of the six trigonometric functions.

sint= 2 2 , cost= 2 2 , tant=1, cott=1, sect= 2 , csct= 2

sint=− 3 2 , cost=− 1 2 tant= 3 , cott= 3 3 , sect=−2, csct=− 2 3 3

## Technology {#fs-id2111791}

For the following exercises, use a graphing calculator to evaluate to
three decimal places.

csc 5π 9

cot 4π 7

--0.228

sec π 10

tan 5π 8

--2.414

sec 3π 4

csc π 4

1.414

tan98°

cot33°

1.540

cot140°

sec310°

1.556

## Extensions {#fs-id2673773}

For the following exercises, use identities to evaluate the expression.

If tan( t )≈2.7, and sin( t )≈0.94, find cos( t ).

If tan( t )≈1.3, and cos( t )≈0.61, find sin( t ).

sin( t )≈0.79

If csc( t )≈3.2, and cos( t )≈0.95, find tan( t ).

If cot( t )≈0.58, and cos( t )≈0.5, find csc( t ).

csct≈1.16

Determine whether the function f(x)=2sinxcosx is even, odd, or neither.

Determine whether the function f(x)=3 sin 2 xcosx+secx is even, odd, or
neither.

even

Determine whether the function f(x)=sinx−2 cos 2 x is even, odd, or
neither.

Determine whether the function f(x)= csc 2 x+secx is even, odd, or
neither.

even

For the following exercises, use identities to simplify the expression.

cscttant

sect csct

sint cost =tant

## Real-World Applications {#fs-id1673030}

The amount of sunlight in a certain city can be modeled by the function
h=15cos( 1 600 d ), where h represents the hours of sunlight, and d is
the day of the year. Use the equation to find how many hours of sunlight
there are on February 11, the 42nd day of the year. State the period of
the function.

The amount of sunlight in a certain city can be modeled by the function
h=16cos( 1 500 d ), where h represents the hours of sunlight, and d is
the day of the year. Use the equation to find how many hours of sunlight
there are on September 24, the 267th day of the year. State the period
of the function.

13.77 hours, period: 1000π

The equation P=20sin( 2πt )+100 models the blood pressure, P, where t
represents time in seconds. (a) Find the blood pressure after 15
seconds. (b) What are the maximum and minimum blood pressures?

The height of a piston, h, in inches, can be modeled by the equation
y=3sinx+1, where x represents the crank angle. Find the height of the
piston when the crank angle is 55°.

3.46 inches

The height of a piston, h, in inches, can be modeled by the equation
y=2cosx+5, where x represents the crank angle. Find the height of the
piston when the crank angle is 55°.

# Chapter Review Exercises {#fs-id1688504}

## [Angles](#) {#fs-id1688507}

For the following exercises, convert the angle measures to degrees.

π 4

45°

− 5π 3

For the following exercises, convert the angle measures to radians.

−210°

− 7π 6

180°

Find the length of an arc in a circle of radius 7 meters subtended by
the central angle of 85°.

10.385 meters

Find the area of the sector of a circle with diameter 32 feet and an
angle of 3π 5 radians.

For the following exercises, find the angle between 0° and 360° that is
coterminal with the given angle.

420°

60°

−80°

For the following exercises, find the angle between 0 and 2π in radians
that is coterminal with the given angle.

− 20π 11

2π 11

14π 5

For the following exercises, draw the angle provided in standard
position on the Cartesian plane.

−210°

75°

5π 4

− π 3

Find the linear speed of a point on the equator of the earth if the
earth has a radius of 3,960 miles and the earth rotates on its axis
every 24 hours. Express answer in miles per hour. Round to the nearest
hundredth.

1036.73 miles per hour

A car wheel with a diameter of 18 inches spins at the rate of 10
revolutions per second. What is the car\'s speed in miles per hour?
Round to the nearest hundredth.

## [Right Triangle Trigonometry](#) {#fs-id2281231}

For the following exercises, use side lengths to evaluate.

cos π 4

2 2

cot π 3

tan π 6

3 3

cos( π 2 )=sin( \_\_\_° )

csc( 18° )=sec( \_\_\_° )

72°

For the following exercises, use the given information to find the
lengths of the other two sides of the right triangle.

cosB= 3 5 ,a=6

tanA= 5 9 ,b=6

a= 10 3 ,c= 2 106 3

For the following exercises, use [\#](#) to evaluate each trigonometric
function.

<figure id="Figure_07_04_221">

</figure>

sinA

tanB

6 11

For the following exercises, solve for the unknown sides of the given
triangle.

a= 5 3 2 ,b= 5 2

A 15-ft ladder leans against a building so that the angle between the
ground and the ladder is 70°. How high does the ladder reach up the side
of the building? Find the answer to four decimal places.

The angle of elevation to the top of a building in Baltimore is found to
be 4 degrees from the ground at a distance of 1 mile from the base of
the building. Using this information, find the height of the building.
Find the answer to four decimal places.

369.2136 ft

## [Unit Circle](#) {#fs-id2388664}

Find the exact value of sin π 3 .

Find the exact value of cos π 4 .

2 2

Find the exact value of cosπ.

State the reference angle for 300°.

60°

State the reference angle for 3π 4 .

Compute cosine of 330°.

3 2

Compute sine of 5π 4 .

State the domain of the sine and cosine functions.

all real numbers

State the range of the sine and cosine functions.

## [The Other Trigonometric Functions](#) {#fs-id1760962}

For the following exercises, find the exact value of the given
expression.

cos π 6

3 2

tan π 4

csc π 3

2 3 3

sec π 4

For the following exercises, use reference angles to evaluate the given
expression.

sec 11π 3

2

sec315°

If sec( t )=−2.5, what is the sec(−t)?

--2.5

If tan(t)=−0.6, what is the tan(−t)?

If tan(t)= 1 3 , find tan(t−π).

1 3

If cos(t)= 2 2 , find sin(t+2π). There are two possible solutions.

Which trigonometric functions are even?

cosine, secant

Which trigonometric functions are odd?

# Chapter Practice Test {#fs-id1798454}

Convert 5π 6 radians to degrees.

150°

Convert −620° to radians.

Find the length of a circular arc with a radius 12 centimeters subtended
by the central angle of 30°.

6.283 centimeters

Find the area of the sector with radius of 8 feet and an angle of 5π 4
radians.

Find the angle between 0° and 360° that is coterminal with 375°.

15°

Find the angle between 0 and 2π in radians that is coterminal with − 4π
7 .

Draw the angle 315° in standard position on the Cartesian plane.

Draw the angle − π 6 in standard position on the Cartesian plane.

A carnival has a Ferris wheel with a diameter of 80 feet. The time for
the Ferris wheel to make one revolution is 75 seconds. What is the
linear speed in feet per second of a point on the Ferris wheel? What is
the angular speed in radians per second?

3.351 feet per second, 2π 75 radians per second

Find the missing sides of the triangle ABC:sinB= 3 4 ,c=12.

Find the missing sides of the triangle.

a= 9 2 ,b= 9 3 2

The angle of elevation to the top of a building in Chicago is found to
be 9 degrees from the ground at a distance of 2000 feet from the base of
the building. Using this information, find the height of the building.

Find the exact value of sin π 6 .

1 2

Compute sine of 240°.

State the domain of the sine and cosine functions.

real numbers

State the range of the sine and cosine functions.

Find the exact value of cot π 4 .

1

Find the exact value of tan π 3 .

Use reference angles to evaluate csc 7π 4 .

− 2

Use reference angles to evaluate tan210°.

If csct=0.68, what is the csc(−t)?

--0.68

If cost= 3 2 , find cos(t−2π).

Find the missing angle: cos( π 6 )=sin( \_\_\_ )

π 3

# 

cosecant

the reciprocal of the sine function: on the unit circle,

csc

t

=

1

y

,

y

≠

0

cotangent

the reciprocal of the tangent function: on the unit circle,

cot

t

=

x

y

,

y

≠

0

identities

statements that are true for all values of the input on which they are
defined

period

the smallest interval

P

of a repeating function

f

such that

f

(

x

\+

P

)

=

f

(

x

)

secant

the reciprocal of the cosine function: on the unit circle,

sec

t

=

1

x

,

x

≠

0

tangent

the quotient of the sine and cosine: on the unit circle,

tan

t

=

y

x

,

x

≠

0
