m49356

> 

be200c8d-a3e9-4e52-baf8-2019856fd2c0

<figure id="CNX_Precalc_Figure_04_00_001">

</figure>

Focus in on a square centimeter of your skin. Look closer. Closer still.
If you could look closely enough, you would see hundreds of thousands of
microscopic organisms. They are bacteria, and they are not only on your
skin, but in your mouth, nose, and even your intestines. In fact, the
bacterial cells in your body at any given moment outnumber your own
cells. But that is no reason to feel bad about yourself. While some
bacteria can cause illness, many are healthy and even essential to the
body.

Bacteria commonly reproduce through a process called binary fission,
during which one bacterial cell splits into two. When conditions are
right, bacteria can reproduce very quickly. Unlike humans and other
complex organisms, the time required to form a new generation of
bacteria is often a matter of minutes or hours, as opposed to days or
years.[^1]

For simplicity's sake, suppose we begin with a culture of one bacterial
cell that can divide every hour. [\#](#) shows the number of bacterial
cells at the end of each subsequent hour. We see that the single
bacterial cell leads to over one thousand bacterial cells in just ten
hours! And if we were to extrapolate the table to twenty-four hours, we
would have over 16 million!

  ------------ --- --- --- --- ---- ---- ---- ----- ----- -----
  *Hour*       0   1   2   3   4    5    6    7     8     9
  *Bacteria*   1   2   4   8   16   32   64   128   256   512
  ------------ --- --- --- --- ---- ---- ---- ----- ----- -----

In this chapter, we will explore exponential functions, which can be
used for, among other things, modeling growth patterns such as those
found in bacteria. We will also investigate logarithmic functions, which
are closely related to exponential functions. Both types of functions
have numerous real-world applications when it comes to modeling and
interpreting data.

[^1]: Todar, PhD, Kenneth. Todar\'s Online Textbook of Bacteriology.
    http://textbookofbacteriology.net/growth_3.html.
