m49362

> Graph exponential functions.
>
> Graph exponential functions using transformations.

73c684c9-6dae-4f32-a1a1-5208b5bf59c2

#  {#eip-994}

## Learning Objectives {#eip-301}

Graph exponential functions (IA 10.2.1).

Function transformations (exponential) (CA 3.5.1-3.5.5).

## Objective 1: Graph exponential functions (IA 10.2.1). {#eip-702}

::: {#eip-542 .example}
Graph exponential functions.

On the same coordinate system graph f(x)=2x and g(x)=2x+1.

We will use point plotting to graph the functions.

Looking at the graphs of the functions f(x)=2x and g(x)=2x+1 above, we
see that adding one in the exponent caused a horizontal shift of one
unit to the left. We can use this pattern to graph other functions using
horizontal shifts.

On the same coordinate system graph f(x)=3x and g(x)=3x−2.

We will use point plotting to graph the functions.

Looking at the graphs of the functions f(x)=3x and g(x)=3x−2, we see
that subtracting 2 caused vertical shift of down two units. Notice that
the horizontal asymptote also shifted down 2 units. We can use this
pattern to help graph other functions with a vertical shift.
:::

### Practice Makes Perfect {#eip-730}

On the same coordinate system graph f(x)=3x and g(x)=3x-1.

On the same coordinate system graph f(x)=3x and g(x)=3x+1.

## Objective 2: Function transformations (exponential). (CA 3.5.1-3.5.5) {#eip-120}

Given a function f(x) , a new function g(x)=f(x)+k where k is a
constant, is a vertical shift of the function f(x). All the output
values change by *k* units. If *k* is a positive, the graph will shift
up. If *k* is negative, the graph will shift down.

Given a function f(x) , a new function g(x)=f(x-h) , where *h* is a
constant, is a horizontal shift of the function f(x) . If *h* is
positive, the graph will shift right. If *h* is negative, the graph will
shift left.

:::: {#eip-525 .note}
::: title
:::

*Given a function and both a vertical and a horizontal shift, sketch the
graph.*

Identify the vertical and horizontal shifts from the formula.

The vertical shift results from a constant added to the output. Move the
graph up for a positive constant and down for a negative constant.

The horizontal shift results from a constant added to the input. Move
the graph left for a positive constant and right for a negative
constant.

Note the order of the shifts, transformations, and reflections follow
the order of operations.
::::

::: {#eip-880 .example}
Function transformations (exponential).

Graph f(x)=3x+2-3

Make a table for f(x)=3x Add a column on the left for x+2 , by
subtracting 2 from all the input values Add a column on the right by
subtracting 3 from all the y-value Two outside columns have the points
for the new graph
:::

:::: {#eip-414 .note}
::: title
:::

How To

*Given a function, reflect the graph both vertically and horizontally.*

Multiply all outputs by --1 for a vertical reflection. The new graph is
a reflection of the original graph about the

x

-axis.

Multiply all inputs by --1 for a horizontal reflection. The new graph is
a reflection of the original graph about the

y

-axis.
::::

### Practice Makes Perfect {#eip-418}

Function transformations (exponential).

Graph f(x)=2x-3-1

ⓐ Given f(x)=3x , reflect it about y-axis and write an equation of a new
function below. ⓑ Given f(x)=3x , reflect it about x-axis and write an
equation of a new function below. ⓒ Given f(x)=3x , shift the graph up 4
units and write an equation of a new function below. ⓓ Graph the
equations found in parts a, b, and c on the coordinate system provided
and check your work using a graphing utility.

As we discussed in the previous section, exponential functions are used
for many real-world applications such as finance, forensics, computer
science, and most of the life sciences. Working with an equation that
describes a real-world situation gives us a method for making
predictions. Most of the time, however, the equation itself is not
enough. We learn a lot about things by seeing their pictorial
representations, and that is exactly why graphing exponential equations
is a powerful tool. It gives us another layer of insight for predicting
future events.

# Graphing Exponential Functions {#fs-id1165135407520}

Before we begin graphing, it is helpful to review the behavior of
exponential growth. Recall the table of values for a function of the
form f(x)= b x whose base is greater than one. We'll use the function
f(x)= 2 x . Observe how the output values in [\#](#) change as the input
increases by 1.

  --------------- ----- ----- ----- --- --- --- ---
  *x*             −3    −2    −1    0   1   2   3
  *f(x)= 2 x*     1 8   1 4   1 2   1   2   4   8
  --------------- ----- ----- ----- --- --- --- ---

Each output value is the product of the previous output and the base, 2.
We call the base 2 the *constant ratio*. In fact, for any exponential
function with the form f(x)=a b x , b is the constant ratio of the
function. This means that as the input increases by 1, the output value
will be the product of the base and the previous output, regardless of
the value of a.

Notice from the table that

the output values are positive for all values of

x

;

as

x

increases, the output values increase without bound; and

as

x

decreases, the output values grow smaller, approaching zero.

[\#](#) shows the exponential growth function f(x)= 2 x .

<figure id="CNX_Precalc_Figure_04_02_001">

</figure>

The domain of f(x)= 2 x is all real numbers, the range is ( 0,∞ ), and
the horizontal asymptote is y=0.

To get a sense of the behavior of exponential decay, we can create a
table of values for a function of the form f(x)= b x whose base is
between zero and one. We'll use the function g(x)= ( 1 2 ) x . Observe
how the output values in [\#](#) change as the input increases by 1.

  --------------------- ---- ---- ---- --- ----- ----- -----
  *x*                   -3   -2   -1   0   1     2     3
  g ( x ) = ( 1 2 ) x   8    4    2    1   1 2   1 4   1 8
  --------------------- ---- ---- ---- --- ----- ----- -----

Again, because the input is increasing by 1, each output value is the
product of the previous output and the base, or constant ratio 1 2 .

Notice from the table that

the output values are positive for all values of

x

;

as

x

increases, the output values grow smaller, approaching zero; and

as

x

decreases, the output values grow without bound.

[\#](#) shows the exponential decay function, g(x)= ( 1 2 ) x .

<figure id="CNX_Precalc_Figure_04_02_002">

</figure>

The domain of g(x)= ( 1 2 ) x is all real numbers, the range is ( 0,∞ ),
and the horizontal asymptote is y=0.

:::: {#fs-id1165135571835 .note}
::: title
Characteristics of the Graph of the Parent Function f(x)= b x
:::

An exponential function with the form f(x)= b x , b\>0, b≠1, has these
characteristics:

one-to-one

function

horizontal asymptote:

y

=

0

domain:

(

--

∞

,

∞

)

range:

(

0

,

∞

)

x-

intercept: none

y-

intercept:

(

0

,

1

)

increasing if

b

\>

1

decreasing if

b

\<

1

[\#](#) compares the graphs of exponential growth and decay functions.

<figure id="CNX_Precalc_Figure_04_02_003">

</figure>
::::

:::: {#fs-id1165134195243 .note}
::: title
:::

How To

*Given an exponential function of the form f(x)= b x , graph the
function.*

Create a table of points.

Plot at least

3

point from the table, including the

y

-intercept

(

0

,

1

)

.

Draw a smooth curve through the points.

State the domain,

(

−

∞

,

∞

)

,

the range,

(

0

,

∞

)

,

and the horizontal asymptote,

y

=

0\.
::::

::: {#Example_04_02_01 .example}
Sketch a graph of f(x)= 0.25 x . State the domain, range, and asymptote.

Before graphing, identify the behavior and create a table of points for
the graph.

Since

b

=

0.25

is between zero and one, we know the function is decreasing. The left
tail of the graph will increase without bound, and the right tail will
approach the asymptote

y

=

0\.

Create a table of points as in

.

  ------------------ ---- ---- ---- --- ------ -------- ----------
  *x*                −3   −2   −1   0   1      2        3
  *f(x)= 0.25 x*     64   16   4    1   0.25   0.0625   0.015625
  ------------------ ---- ---- ---- --- ------ -------- ----------

Plot the

y

-intercept,

(

0

,

1

)

,

along with two other points. We can use

(

−

1

,

4

)

and

(

1

,

0.25

)

.

Draw a smooth curve connecting the points as in [\#](#).

<figure id="CNX_Precalc_Figure_04_02_004">

</figure>

The domain is ( −∞,∞ ); the range is ( 0,∞ ); the horizontal asymptote
is y=0.
:::

:::: {#fs-id1165135499977 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Sketch the graph of f(x)= 4 x . State the domain, range, and asymptote.

The domain is ( −∞,∞ ); the range is ( 0,∞ ); the horizontal asymptote
is y=0.
::::

# Graphing Transformations of Exponential Functions {#fs-id1165137694074}

Transformations of exponential graphs behave similarly to those of other
functions. Just as with other parent functions, we can apply the four
types of transformations---shifts, reflections, stretches, and
compressions---to the parent function f(x)= b x without loss of shape.
For instance, just as the quadratic function maintains its parabolic
shape when shifted, reflected, stretched, or compressed, the exponential
function also maintains its general shape regardless of the
transformations applied.

## Graphing a Vertical Shift {#fs-id1165134312214}

The first transformation occurs when we add a constant d to the parent
function f(x)= b x , giving us a vertical shift d units in the same
direction as the sign. For example, if we begin by graphing a parent
function, f(x)= 2 x , we can then graph two vertical shifts alongside
it, using d=3: the upward shift, g(x)= 2 x +3 and the downward shift,
h(x)= 2 x −3. Both vertical shifts are shown in [\#](#).

<figure id="CNX_Precalc_Figure_04_02_006">

</figure>

Observe the results of shifting f(x)= 2 x vertically:

The domain,

(

−

∞

,

∞

)

remains unchanged.

When the function is shifted up

3

units to

g

(

x

)

=

2

x

\+

3

:

The

y-

intercept shifts up

3

units to

(

0

,

4

)

.

The asymptote shifts up

3

units to

y

=

3\.

The range becomes

(

3

,

∞

)

.

When the function is shifted down

3

units to

h

(

x

)

=

2

x

−

3

:

The

y-

intercept shifts down

3

units to

(

0

,

−

2

)

.

The asymptote also shifts down

3

units to

y

=

−

3\.

The range becomes

(

−

3

,

∞

)

.

## Graphing a Horizontal Shift {#fs-id1165137566517}

The next transformation occurs when we add a constant c to the input of
the parent function f(x)= b x , giving us a horizontal shift c units in
the *opposite* direction of the sign. For example, if we begin by
graphing the parent function f(x)= 2 x , we can then graph two
horizontal shifts alongside it, using c=3: the shift left, g(x)= 2 x+3 ,
and the shift right, h(x)= 2 x−3 . Both horizontal shifts are shown in
[\#](#).

<figure id="CNX_Precalc_Figure_04_02_007">

</figure>

Observe the results of shifting f(x)= 2 x horizontally:

The domain,

(

−

∞

,

∞

)

,

remains unchanged.

The asymptote,

y

=

0

,

remains unchanged.

The

y-

intercept shifts such that:

When the function is shifted left

3

units to

g

(

x

)

=

2

x

\+

3

,

the

y

-intercept becomes

(

0

,

8

)

.

This is because

2

x

\+

3

=

(

8

)

2

x

,

so the initial value of the function is

8\.

When the function is shifted right

3

units to

h

(

x

)

=

2

x

−

3

,

the

y

-intercept becomes

(

0

,

1

8

)

.

Again, see that

2

x

−

3

=

(

1

8

)

2

x

,

so the initial value of the function is

1

8

.

:::: {#fs-id1165134042183 .note}
::: title
Shifts of the Parent Function *f*(*x*) = *bx*
:::

For any constants c and d, the function f(x)= b x+c +d shifts the parent
function f(x)= b x

vertically

d

units, in the

same

direction of the sign of

d

.

horizontally

c

units, in the

opposite

direction of the sign of

c

.

The

y

-intercept becomes

(

0

,

b

c

\+

d

)

.

The horizontal asymptote becomes

y

=

d

.

The range becomes

(

d

,

∞

)

.

The domain,

(

−

∞

,

∞

)

,

remains unchanged.
::::

:::: {#fs-id1165135500732 .note}
::: title
:::

How To

*Given an exponential function with the form f(x)= b x+c +d, graph the
translation.*

Draw the horizontal asymptote

y

=

d

.

Identify the shift as

(

−

c

,

d

)

.

Shift the graph of

f

(

x

)

=

b

x

left

c

units if

c

is positive, and right

c

units if

c

is negative.

Shift the graph of

f

(

x

)

=

b

x

up

d

units if

d

is positive, and down

d

units if

d

is negative.

State the domain,

(

−

∞

,

∞

)

,

the range,

(

d

,

∞

)

,

and the horizontal asymptote

y

=

d

.
::::

::: {#Example_04_02_02 .example}
Graph f(x)= 2 x+1 −3. State the domain, range, and asymptote.

We have an exponential equation of the form f(x)= b x+c +d, with b=2,
c=1, and d=−3.

Draw the horizontal asymptote y=d , so draw y=−3.

Identify the shift as ( −c,d ), so the shift is ( −1,−3 ).

Shift the graph of f(x)= b x left 1 units and down 3 units.

<figure id="CNX_Precalc_Figure_04_02_008">

</figure>

The domain is ( −∞,∞ ); the range is ( −3,∞ ); the horizontal asymptote
is y=−3.
:::

:::: {#fs-id1165135241073 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Graph f(x)= 2 x−1 +3. State domain, range, and asymptote.

The domain is ( −∞,∞ ); the range is ( 3,∞ ); the horizontal asymptote
is y=3.
::::

:::: {#fs-id1165137639988 .note}
::: title
:::

How To

*Given an equation of the form f(x)= b x+c +d for x, use a graphing
calculator to approximate the solution.*

Press

\[Y=\]

. Enter the given exponential equation in the line headed "

Y

1

=

".

Enter the given value for

f

(

x

)

in the line headed "

Y

2

=

".

Press

\[WINDOW\]

. Adjust the

y

-axis so that it includes the value entered for "

Y

2

=

".

Press

\[GRAPH\]

to observe the graph of the exponential function along with the line for
the specified value of

f

(

x

)

.

To find the value of

x

,

we compute the point of intersection. Press

\[2ND\]

then

\[CALC\]

. Select "intersect" and press

\[ENTER\]

three times. The point of intersection gives the value of

x

for the indicated value of the function.
::::

::: {#Example_04_02_03 .example}
Solve 42=1.2 ( 5 ) x +2.8 graphically. Round to the nearest thousandth.

Press *\[Y=\]* and enter 1.2 ( 5 ) x +2.8 next to *Y1*=. Then enter 42
next to *Y2=*. For a window, use the values --3 to 3 for x and --5 to 55
for y. Press *\[GRAPH\]*. The graphs should intersect somewhere near
x=2.

For a better approximation, press *\[2ND\]* then *\[CALC\]*. Select
*\[5: intersect\]* and press *\[ENTER\]* three times. The *x*-coordinate
of the point of intersection is displayed as 2.1661943. (Your answer may
be different if you use a different window or use a different value for
*Guess?*) To the nearest thousandth, x≈2.166.
:::

:::: {#fs-id1165135545893 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Solve 4=7.85 ( 1.15 ) x −2.27 graphically. Round to the nearest
thousandth.

x≈−1.608
::::

## Graphing a Stretch or Compression {#fs-id1165137431154}

While horizontal and vertical shifts involve adding constants to the
input or to the function itself, a stretch or compression occurs when we
multiply the parent function f(x)= b x by a constant \|a\|\>0. For
example, if we begin by graphing the parent function f(x)= 2 x , we can
then graph the stretch, using a=3, to get g(x)=3 ( 2 ) x as shown on the
left in [\#](#), and the compression, using a= 1 3 , to get h(x)= 1 3 (
2 ) x as shown on the right in [\#](#).

<figure id="CNX_Precalc_Figure_04_02_010">

</figure>

:::: {#fs-id1165137627908 .note}
::: title
Stretches and Compressions of the Parent Function f(x)= b x
:::

For any factor a\>0, the function f(x)=a ( b ) x

is stretched vertically by a factor of

a

if

\|

a

\|

\>

1\.

is compressed vertically by a factor of

a

if

\|

a

\|

\<

1\.

has a

y

-intercept of

(

0

,

a

)

.

has a horizontal asymptote at

y

=

0

,

a range of

(

0

,

∞

)

,

and a domain of

(

−

∞

,

∞

)

,

which are unchanged from the parent function.
::::

::: {#Example_04_02_04 .example}
Sketch a graph of f(x)=4 ( 1 2 ) x . State the domain, range, and
asymptote.

Before graphing, identify the behavior and key points on the graph.

Since

b

=

1

2

is between zero and one, the left tail of the graph will increase
without bound as

x

decreases, and the right tail will approach the

x

-axis as

x

increases.

Since

a

=

4

,

the graph of

f

(

x

)

=

(

1

2

)

x

will be stretched by a factor of

4\.

Create a table of points as shown in

.

  ------------------- ---- ---- ---- --- --- --- -----
  *x*                 −3   −2   −1   0   1   2   3
  f(x) =4 ( 1 2 ) x   32   16   8    4   2   1   0.5
  ------------------- ---- ---- ---- --- --- --- -----

Plot the

y-

intercept,

(

0

,

4

)

,

along with two other points. We can use

(

−

1

,

8

)

and

(

1

,

2

)

.

Draw a smooth curve connecting the points, as shown in [\#](#).

<figure id="CNX_Precalc_Figure_04_02_011">

</figure>

The domain is ( −∞,∞ ); the range is ( 0,∞ ); the horizontal asymptote
is y=0.
:::

:::: {#fs-id1165135541809 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Sketch the graph of f(x)= 1 2 ( 4 ) x . State the domain, range, and
asymptote.

The domain is ( −∞,∞ ); the range is ( 0,∞ ); the horizontal asymptote
is y=0.
::::

## Graphing Reflections {#fs-id1165135433028}

In addition to shifting, compressing, and stretching a graph, we can
also reflect it about the *x*-axis or the *y*-axis. When we multiply the
parent function f(x)= b x by −1, we get a reflection about the *x*-axis.
When we multiply the input by −1, we get a reflection about the
*y*-axis. For example, if we begin by graphing the parent function f(x)=
2 x , we can then graph the two reflections alongside it. The reflection
about the *x*-axis, g(x)= −2 x , is shown on the left side of [\#](#),
and the reflection about the *y*-axis h(x)= 2 −x , is shown on the right
side of [\#](#).

<figure id="CNX_Precalc_Figure_04_02_013">

</figure>

:::: {#fs-id1165135477501 .note}
::: title
Reflections of the Parent Function f(x)= b x
:::

The function f(x)=− b x

reflects the parent function

f

(

x

)

=

b

x

about the

x

-axis.

has a

y

-intercept of

(

0

,

−

1

)

.

has a range of

(

−

∞

,

0

)

.

has a horizontal asymptote at

y

=

0

and domain of

(

−

∞

,

∞

)

,

which are unchanged from the parent function.

The function f(x)= b −x

reflects the parent function

f

(

x

)

=

b

x

about the

y

-axis.

has a

y

-intercept of

(

0

,

1

)

,

a horizontal asymptote at

y

=

0

,

a range of

(

0

,

∞

)

,

and a domain of

(

−

∞

,

∞

)

,

which are unchanged from the parent function.
::::

::: {#Example_04_02_05 .example}
Find and graph the equation for a function, g(x), that reflects f(x)= (
1 4 ) x about the *x*-axis. State its domain, range, and asymptote.

Since we want to reflect the parent function f(x)= ( 1 4 ) x about the
*x-*axis, we multiply f(x) by −1 to get, g(x)=− ( 1 4 ) x . Next we
create a table of points as in [\#](#).

  ------------------ ----- ----- ---- ---- ------- --------- ---------
  *x*                −3    −2    −1   0    1       2         3
  g(x)=− ( 1 4 ) x   −64   −16   −4   −1   −0.25   −0.0625   −0.0156
  ------------------ ----- ----- ---- ---- ------- --------- ---------

Plot the *y-*intercept, ( 0,−1 ), along with two other points. We can
use ( −1,−4 ) and ( 1,−0.25 ).

Draw a smooth curve connecting the points:

<figure id="CNX_Precalc_Figure_04_02_014">

</figure>

The domain is ( −∞,∞ ); the range is ( −∞,0 ); the horizontal asymptote
is y=0.
:::

:::: {#fs-id1165135205992 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Find and graph the equation for a function, g(x), that reflects f(x)=
1.25 x about the *y*-axis. State its domain, range, and asymptote.

The domain is ( −∞,∞ ); the range is ( 0,∞ ); the horizontal asymptote
is y=0.
::::

## Summarizing Translations of the Exponential Function {#fs-id1165135501015}

Now that we have worked with each type of translation for the
exponential function, we can summarize them in [\#](#) to arrive at the
general equation for translating exponential functions.

+----------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Transformations of the Parent Function f(x)= b x                     |
+-------------------------------------------+--------------------------+
| Transformation                            | Form                     |
+===========================================+==========================+
| Shift Horizontally c units to the left    | f(x)= b x+c +d           |
| Vertically d units up                     |                          |
+-------------------------------------------+--------------------------+
| Stretch and Compress Stretch if \| a      | f(x)=a b x               |
| \|\>1 Compression if 0\<\| a \|\<1        |                          |
+-------------------------------------------+--------------------------+
| Reflect about the *x*-axis                | f(x)=− b x               |
+-------------------------------------------+--------------------------+
| Reflect about the *y*-axis                | f(x)= b −x = ( 1 b ) x   |
+-------------------------------------------+--------------------------+
| General equation for all transformations  | f(x)=a b x+c +d          |
+-------------------------------------------+--------------------------+

:::: {#fs-id1165137635134 .note}
::: title
Translations of Exponential Functions
:::

A translation of an exponential function has the form

$$~f(x) = ab^{x + c} + d$$

Where the parent function, y= b x , b\>1, is

shifted horizontally

c

units to the left.

stretched vertically by a factor of

\|

a

\|

if

\|

a

\|

\>

0\.

compressed vertically by a factor of

\|

a

\|

if

0

\<

\|

a

\|

\<

1\.

shifted vertically

d

units.

reflected about the

x-

axis when

a

\<

0\.

Note the order of the shifts, transformations, and reflections follow
the order of operations.
::::

::: {#Example_04_02_06 .example}
Write the equation for the function described below. Give the horizontal
asymptote, the domain, and the range.

f

(

x

)

=

e

x

is vertically stretched by a factor of

2

, reflected across the

y

-axis, and then shifted up

4

units.

We want to find an equation of the general form  f(x)=a b x+c +d. We use
the description provided to find a, b, c, and d.

We are given the parent function

f

(

x

)

=

e

x

,

so

b

=

e

.

The function is stretched by a factor of

2

, so

a

=

2\.

The function is reflected about the

y

-axis. We replace

x

with

−

x

to get:

e

−

x

.

The graph is shifted vertically 4 units, so

d

=

4\.

Substituting in the general form we get,

$$\begin{array}{ll}
{~f(x)} & {= ab^{x + c} + d} \\
 & {= 2e^{- x + 0} + 4} \\
 & {= 2e^{- x} + 4}
\end{array}$$

The domain is ( −∞,∞ ); the range is ( 4,∞ ); the horizontal asymptote
is y=4.
:::

:::: {#fs-id1165137553895 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Write the equation for function described below. Give the horizontal
asymptote, the domain, and the range.

f

(

x

)

=

e

x

is compressed vertically by a factor of

1

3

,

reflected across the

x

-axis and then shifted down

2

units.

f(x)=− 1 3 e x −2; the domain is ( −∞,∞ ); the range is ( −∞,−2 ); the
horizontal asymptote is y=−2.
::::

:::: {#fs-id1165135560786 .note}
::: title
:::

Media

Access this online resource for additional instruction and practice with
graphing exponential functions.

Graph Exponential Functions
::::

# Key Equations {#fs-id1165137661989}

  ------------------------------------------------------------------- -----------------
  General Form for the Translation of the Parent Function f(x)= b x   f(x)=a b x+c +d
  ------------------------------------------------------------------- -----------------

# Key Concepts {#fs-id1165137447701}

The graph of the function

f

(

x

)

=

b

x

has a

y-

intercept at

(

0

,

1

)

,

domain

(

−

∞

,

∞

)

,

range

(

0

,

∞

)

,

and horizontal asymptote

y

=

0\.

See

.

If

b

\>

1

,

the function is increasing. The left tail of the graph will approach the
asymptote

y

=

0

,

and the right tail will increase without bound.

If

0

\<

b

\<

1

,

the function is decreasing. The left tail of the graph will increase
without bound, and the right tail will approach the asymptote

y

=

0\.

The equation

f

(

x

)

=

b

x

\+

d

represents a vertical shift of the parent function

f

(

x

)

=

b

x

.

The equation

f

(

x

)

=

b

x

\+

c

represents a horizontal shift of the parent function

f

(

x

)

=

b

x

.

See

.

Approximate solutions of the equation

f

(

x

)

=

b

x

\+

c

\+

d

can be found using a graphing calculator. See

.

The equation

f

(

x

)

=

a

b

x

,

where

a

\>

0

,

represents a vertical stretch if

\|

a

\|

\>

1

or compression if

0

\<

\|

a

\|

\<

1

of the parent function

f

(

x

)

=

b

x

.

See

.

When the parent function

f

(

x

)

=

b

x

is multiplied by

−

1

,

the result,

f

(

x

)

=

−

b

x

,

is a reflection about the

x

-axis. When the input is multiplied by

−

1

,

the result,

f

(

x

)

=

b

−

x

,

is a reflection about the

y

-axis. See

.

All translations of the exponential function can be summarized by the
general equation

f

(

x

)

=

a

b

x

\+

c

\+

d

.

See

.

Using the general equation

f

(

x

)

=

a

b

x

\+

c

\+

d

,

we can write the equation of a function given its description. See

.

# Section Exercises {#fs-id1165137634271}

## Verbal {#fs-id1165137634275}

What role does the horizontal asymptote of an exponential function play
in telling us about the end behavior of the graph?

An asymptote is a line that the graph of a function approaches, as x
either increases or decreases without bound. The horizontal asymptote of
an exponential function tells us the limit of the function's values as
the independent variable gets either extremely large or extremely small.

What is the advantage of knowing how to recognize transformations of the
graph of a parent function algebraically?

## Algebraic {#fs-id1165137769974}

The graph of f(x)= 3 x is reflected about the *y*-axis and stretched
vertically by a factor of 4. What is the equation of the new function,
g(x)? State its *y*-intercept, domain, and range.

g(x)=4 ( 3 ) −x ; *y*-intercept: (0,4); Domain: all real numbers; Range:
all real numbers greater than 0.

The graph of f(x)= ( 1 2 ) −x is reflected about the *y*-axis and
compressed vertically by a factor of 1 5 . What is the equation of the
new function, g(x)? State its *y*-intercept, domain, and range.

The graph of f(x)= 10 x is reflected about the *x*-axis and shifted
upward 7 units. What is the equation of the new function, g(x)? State
its *y*-intercept, domain, and range.

g(x)=− 10 x +7; *y*-intercept: ( 0,6 ); Domain: all real numbers; Range:
all real numbers less than 7.

The graph of f(x)= ( 1.68 ) x is shifted right 3 units, stretched
vertically by a factor of 2, reflected about the *x*-axis, and then
shifted downward 3 units. What is the equation of the new function,
g(x)? State its *y*-intercept (to the nearest thousandth), domain, and
range.

The graph of fx=-12(14)x-2+4 is shifted downward 4 units, and then
shifted left 2 units, stretched vertically by a factor of 4, and
reflected about the *x*-axis. What is the equation of the new function,
g(x)? State its *y*-intercept, domain, and range.

g(x)=2 ( 1 4 ) x ; *y*-intercept: ( 0,2 ); Domain: all real numbers;
Range: all real numbers greater than 0.

## Graphical {#fs-id1165137597358}

For the following exercises, graph the function and its reflection about
the *y*-axis on the same axes, and give the *y*-intercept.

f(x)=3 ( 1 2 ) x

g(x)=−2 ( 0.25 ) x

*y*-intercept: (0,−2)

h(x)=6 ( 1.75 ) −x

For the following exercises, graph each set of functions on the same
axes.

f(x)=3 ( 1 4 ) x , g(x)=3 ( 2 ) x , and h(x)=3 ( 4 ) x

f(x)= 1 4 ( 3 ) x , g(x)=2 ( 3 ) x , and h(x)=4 ( 3 ) x

For the following exercises, match each function with one of the graphs
in [\#](#).

<figure id="CNX_Precalc_Figure_04_02_206">

</figure>

f( x )=2 ( 0.69 ) x

B

f( x )=2 ( 1.28 ) x

f( x )=2 ( 0.81 ) x

A

f( x )=4 ( 1.28 ) x

f( x )=2 ( 1.59 ) x

E

f( x )=4 ( 0.69 ) x

For the following exercises, use the graphs shown in [\#](#). All have
the form f( x )=a b x .

<figure id="CNX_Precalc_Figure_04_02_207">

</figure>

Which graph has the largest value for b?

D

Which graph has the smallest value for b?

Which graph has the largest value for a?

C

Which graph has the smallest value for a?

For the following exercises, graph the function and its reflection about
the *x*-axis on the same axes.

f(x)= 1 2 ( 4 ) x

f(x)=3 ( 0.75 ) x −1

f(x)=−4 ( 2 ) x +2

For the following exercises, graph the transformation of f(x)= 2 x .
Give the horizontal asymptote, the domain, and the range.

f( x )= 2 −x

h( x )= 2 x +3

Horizontal asymptote: h(x)=3; Domain: all real numbers; Range: all real
numbers strictly greater than 3.

f( x )= 2 x−2

For the following exercises, describe the end behavior of the graphs of
the functions.

f( x )=−5 ( 4 ) x −1

As x→∞ , f( x )→−∞ ; As x→−∞ , f( x )→−1

f( x )=3 ( 1 2 ) x −2

f( x )=3 ( 4 ) −x +2

As x→∞ , f( x)→2 ; As x→−∞ , f( x )→∞

For the following exercises, start with the graph of f( x )= 4 x . Then
write a function that results from the given transformation.

Shift f(x) 4 units upward

Shift f(x) 3 units downward

f( x )= 4 x −3

Shift f(x) 2 units left

Shift f(x) 5 units right

f(x)= 4 x−5

Reflect f(x) about the *x*-axis

Reflect f(x) about the *y*-axis

f( x )= 4 −x

For the following exercises, each graph is a transformation of y= 2 x .
Write an equation describing the transformation.

y=− 2 x +3

For the following exercises, find an exponential equation for the graph.

y=−2 ( 3 ) x +7

## Numeric {#fs-id1165135560731}

For the following exercises, evaluate the exponential functions for the
indicated value of x.

g(x)= 1 3 ( 7 ) x−2 for g(6).

g(6)=800+ 1 3 ≈800.3333

f(x)=4 (2) x−1 −2 for f(5).

h(x)=− 1 2 ( 1 2 ) x +6 for h(−7).

h(−7)=−58

## Technology {#fs-id1165135321925}

For the following exercises, use a graphing calculator to approximate
the solutions of the equation. Round to the nearest thousandth.

−50=− ( 1 2 ) −x

116= 1 4 ( 1 8 ) x

x≈−2.953

12=2 ( 3 ) x +1

5=3 ( 1 2 ) x−1 −2

x≈−0.222

−30=−4 ( 2 ) x+2 +2

## Extensions {#fs-id1165137697128}

Explore and discuss the graphs of F(x)= ( b ) x and G(x)= ( 1 b ) x .
Then make a conjecture about the relationship between the graphs of the
functions b x and ( 1 b ) x for any real number b\>0.

The graph of G(x)= ( 1 b ) x is the refelction about the *y*-axis of the
graph of F(x)= b x ; For any real number b\>0 and function f(x)= b x ,
the graph of ( 1 b ) x is the the reflection about the *y*-axis, F(−x).

Prove the conjecture made in the previous exercise.

Explore and discuss the graphs of f(x)= 4 x , g(x)= 4 x−2 , and h(x)=( 1
16 ) 4 x . Then make a conjecture about the relationship between the
graphs of the functions b x and ( 1 b n ) b x for any real number *n*
and real number b\>0.

The graphs of g(x) and h(x) are the same and are a horizontal shift to
the right of the graph of f(x); For any real number *n*, real number
b\>0, and function f(x)= b x , the graph of ( 1 b n ) b x is the
horizontal shift f(x−n).

Prove the conjecture made in the previous exercise.
