m49363

> In this section, you will:
>
> Convert from logarithmic to exponential form.
>
> Convert from exponential to logarithmic form.
>
> Evaluate logarithms.
>
> Use common logarithms.
>
> Use natural logarithms.

746b4be7-5dfd-4d01-8293-06ef750e0365

#  {#eip-566}

## Learning Objectives {#fs-idm408684752}

Convert between exponential and logarithmic form. (IA 10.3.1)

Evaluate logarithmic functions. (IA 10.3.2)

## Objective 1: Convert between exponential and logarithmic form. (IA 10.3.1) {#eip-823}

### Practice Makes Perfect {#eip-513}

Graph the exponential function f(x)=2x by making a table.

  x   y=f(x)
  --- --------
      
      
      
      
      

Is it one-to-one? Domain? Range? Graph the inverse of f(x)=2x on the
grid above by interchanging x and y coordinates in the table. x y=f(x)
Is the inverse one-to-one function? Domain? Range?

::: {#eip-825 .example}
Find the inverse of f(x)=2x

  ------------------------------------- ---------------------------------------
  Rewrite with y=f(x)                   y=2x
  Interchange the variables x and y .   x=2y
  Solve for y .                         Oops! We have no way to solve for y .
  ------------------------------------- ---------------------------------------

We give y a new notation: y=logx2 \" y=logx2 \" read \"*the logarithm,
base 2 of *x**\", means \"the power to which we raise 2 to get *x*\".
The function y=logax *is equivalent to* ay=x *is the logarithmic
function with base* a, where a\>0, x\>0
:::

Since the equations y=logax and x=ay are equivalent, we can go back and
forth between them. This will often be the method to solve some
exponential and logarithmic equations. To help with converting back and
forth, let's take a close look at the equations. Notice the positions of
the exponent and base.

<figure id="CNX_IntAlg_Figure_10_03_001">

</figure>

If we remember the logarithm is the exponent, it makes the conversion
easier. You may want to repeat, "base to the exponent gives us the
number."

::: {#eip-202 .example}
Convert between exponential and logarithmic form.

ⓐ Convert to logarithmic form: 23=8

Identify the base and the exponent: the base is 2 and the exponent is 3.
Then we have 3=log28 .

ⓑ Convert to exponential form: logbm=a

Identify the base and the exponent: the base is *b* and the exponent is
*a*. Then we have ba=m .
:::

### Practice Makes Perfect {#eip-814}

Convert between exponential and logarithmic form.

Remember these logarithmic notations to help complete the following:
*Common Logarithm* logx=logx10 *Natural Logarithm* lnx=logxe

Convert to logarithmic form. ⓐ 8=2x ⓑ 10-2=0.01 ⓒ ex=40

Convert to exponential form. ⓐ log813=4 ⓑ ln 1=0 ⓒ log10000=4

## Objective 2: Evaluate logarithmic functions (IA 10.3.2). {#eip-69}

We can solve and evaluate logarithmic equations by using the technique
of converting the equation to its equivalent exponential form.

::: {#eip-815 .example}
Find the value of *x*: ⓐ logx36=2, ⓑ log4x=3, and ⓒ log1218=x.

ⓐ

  ----------------------------------------------------------------------------- ------------------------
                                                                                logx36=2
  Convert to exponential form.                                                  x2=36
  Solve the quadratic.                                                          x=6,x=−6
  The base of a logarithmic function must be positive, so we eliminate x=−6 .   x=6Therefore,log636=2.
  ----------------------------------------------------------------------------- ------------------------

ⓑ

  ------------------------------ -------------------------
                                 log4x=3
  Convert to exponential form.   43=x
  Simplify.                      x=64Therefore,log464=3.
  ------------------------------ -------------------------

ⓒ

  -------------------------------------------------- ------------------------
                                                     log1218=x
  Convert to exponential form.                       (12)x=18
  Rewrite 18 as (12)3 .                              (12)x=(12)3
  With the same base, the exponents must be equal.   x=3Therefore,log1218=3
  -------------------------------------------------- ------------------------
:::

### Practice Makes Perfect {#eip-115}

Find the value of x . ⓐ log25x=2 ⓑ logx4=2 ⓒ logx13=2

Evaluate each of the following. ⓐ log10010 ⓑ log0.1 ⓒ log24 ⓓ log120 ⓔ
log44 ⓕ log193 ⓖ log22 ⓗ ln e-5

<figure id="CNX_Precalc_Figure_04_03_001">

</figure>

In 2010, a major earthquake struck Haiti, destroying or damaging over
285,000 homes[^1]. One year later, another, stronger earthquake
devastated Honshu, Japan, destroying or damaging over 332,000
buildings,[^2] like those shown in [\#](#). Even though both caused
substantial damage, the earthquake in 2011 was 100 times stronger than
the earthquake in Haiti. How do we know? The magnitudes of earthquakes
are measured on a scale known as the Richter Scale. The Haitian
earthquake registered a 7.0 on the Richter Scale[^3] whereas the
Japanese earthquake registered a 9.0.[^4]

The Richter Scale is a base-ten logarithmic scale. In other words, an
earthquake of magnitude 8 is not twice as great as an earthquake of
magnitude 4. It is 10 8−4 = 10 4 =10,000 times as great! In this lesson,
we will investigate the nature of the Richter Scale and the base-ten
function upon which it depends.

# Converting from Logarithmic to Exponential Form {#fs-id1165137644550}

In order to analyze the magnitude of earthquakes or compare the
magnitudes of two different earthquakes, we need to be able to convert
between logarithmic and exponential form. For example, suppose the
amount of energy released from one earthquake were 500 times greater
than the amount of energy released from another. We want to calculate
the difference in magnitude. The equation that represents this problem
is 10 x =500, where x represents the difference in magnitudes on the
Richter Scale. How would we solve for x?

We have not yet learned a method for solving exponential equations. None
of the algebraic tools discussed so far is sufficient to solve 10 x
=500. We know that 10 2 =100 and 10 3 =1000, so it is clear that x must
be some value between 2 and 3, since y= 10 x is increasing. We can
examine a graph, as in [\#](#)*,* to better estimate the solution.

<figure id="CNX_Precalc_Figure_04_03_002">

</figure>

Estimating from a graph, however, is imprecise. To find an algebraic
solution, we must introduce a new function. Observe that the graph in
[\#](#) passes the horizontal line test. The exponential function y= b x
is one-to-one, so its inverse, x= b y is also a function. As is the case
with all inverse functions, we simply interchange x and y and solve for
y to find the inverse function. To represent y as a function of x, we
use a logarithmic function of the form y= log b ( x ). The base b
*logarithm* of a number is the exponent by which we must raise b to get
that number.

We read a logarithmic expression as, "The logarithm with base b of x is
equal to y, " or, simplified, "log base b of x is y. " We can also say,
" b raised to the power of y is x, " because logs are exponents. For
example, the base 2 logarithm of 32 is 5, because 5 is the exponent we
must apply to 2 to get 32. Since 2 5 =32, we can write log 2 32=5. We
read this as "log base 2 of 32 is 5."

We can express the relationship between logarithmic form and its
corresponding exponential form as follows:

$$\log_{b}(x) = y\Leftrightarrow b^{y} = x,b > 0,b \neq 1$$

Note that the base b is always positive.

Because logarithm is a function, it is most correctly written as log b
(x), using parentheses to denote function evaluation, just as we would
with f(x). However, when the input is a single variable or number, it is
common to see the parentheses dropped and the expression written without
parentheses, as log b x. Note that many calculators require parentheses
around the x.

We can illustrate the notation of logarithms as follows:

Notice that, comparing the logarithm function and the exponential
function, the input and the output are switched. This means y= log b ( x
) and y= b x are inverse functions.

:::: {#fs-id1165137472937 .note}
::: title
Definition of the Logarithmic Function
:::

A logarithm base b of a positive number x satisfies the following
definition.

For x\>0,b\>0,b≠1,

$$y = \log_{b}(x)\mspace{9mu}\text{is~equivalent~to~}b^{y} = x$$

where,

we read

log

b

(

x

)

as, "the logarithm with base

b

of

x

" or the "log base

b

of

x

.

\"

the logarithm

y

is the exponent to which

b

must be raised to get

x

.

Also, since the logarithmic and exponential functions switch the x and y
values, the domain and range of the exponential function are
interchanged for the logarithmic function. Therefore,

the domain of the logarithm function with base

b

is

(

0

,

∞

)

.

the range of the logarithm function with base

b

is

(

−

∞

,

∞

)

.
::::

:::: {#fs-id1165137677696 .note}
::: title
:::

Q&A

*Can we take the logarithm of a negative number?*

*No. Because the base of an exponential function is always positive, no
power of that base can ever be negative. We can never take the logarithm
of a negative number. Also, we cannot take the logarithm of zero.
Calculators may output a log of a negative number when in complex mode,
but the log of a negative number is not a real number.*
::::

:::: {#fs-id1165137874700 .note}
::: title
:::

How To

*Given an equation in logarithmic form* log b ( x )=y, *convert it to
exponential form.*

Examine the equation

y

=

log

b

(

x

)

and identify

b

,

y

,

and

x

.

Rewrite

log

b

(

x

)

=

y

as

b

y

=

x

.
::::

::: {#Example_04_03_01 .example}
Write the following logarithmic equations in exponential form.

ⓐ

log

6

(

6

)

=

1

2

ⓑ

log

3

(

9

)

=

2

First, identify the values of b,y,and x. Then, write the equation in the
form b y =x.

ⓐ

log

6

(

6

)

=

1

2

Here, b=6,y= 1 2 ,and x= 6. Therefore, the equation log 6 ( 6 )= 1 2 is
equivalent to 6 1 2 = 6 .

ⓑ

log

3

(

9

)

=

2

Here, b=3,y=2,and x=9. Therefore, the equation log 3 ( 9 )=2 is
equivalent to 3 2 =9.
:::

:::: {#fs-id1165137640140 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Write the following logarithmic equations in exponential form.

ⓐ

log

10

(

1,

000,

000

)

=

6

ⓑ

log

5

(

25

)

=

2

ⓐ

log

10

(

1

,

000

,

000

)

=

6

is equivalent to

10

6

=

1

,

000

,

000

ⓑ

log

5

(

25

)

=

2

is equivalent to

5

2

=

25
::::

# Converting from Exponential to Logarithmic Form {#fs-id1165137585244}

To convert from exponents to logarithms, we follow the same steps in
reverse. We identify the base b, exponent x, and output y. Then we write
x= log b ( y ).

::: {#Example_04_03_02 .example}
Write the following exponential equations in logarithmic form.

2

3

=

8

5

2

=

25

10

−

4

=

1

10,000

First, identify the values of b,y,andx. Then, write the equation in the
form x= log b ( y ).

2

3

=

8

Here, b=2, x=3, and y=8. Therefore, the equation 2 3 =8 is equivalent to
log 2 (8)=3.

5

2

=

25

Here, b=5, x=2, and y=25. Therefore, the equation 5 2 =25 is equivalent
to log 5 (25)=2.

10

−

4

=

1

10,000

Here, b=10, x=−4, and y= 1 10,000 . Therefore, the equation 10 −4 = 1
10,000 is equivalent to log 10 ( 1 10,000 )=−4.
:::

:::: {#fs-id1165137438165 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Write the following exponential equations in logarithmic form.

ⓐ

3

2

=

9

ⓑ

5

3

=

125

ⓒ

2

−

1

=

1

2

ⓐ

3

2

=

9

is equivalent to

log

3

(

9

)

=

2

ⓑ

5

3

=

125

is equivalent to

log

5

(

125

)

=

3

ⓒ

2

−

1

=

1

2

is equivalent to

log

2

(

1

2

)

=

−

1
::::

# Evaluating Logarithms {#fs-id1165137530906}

Knowing the squares, cubes, and roots of numbers allows us to evaluate
many logarithms mentally. For example, consider log 2 8. We ask, "To
what exponent must 2 be raised in order to get 8?" Because we already
know 2 3 =8, it follows that log 2 8=3.

Now consider solving log 7 49 and log 3 27 mentally.

We ask, "To what exponent must 7 be raised in order to get 49?" We know

7

2

=

49\.

Therefore,

log

7

49

=

2

We ask, "To what exponent must 3 be raised in order to get 27?" We know

3

3

=

27\.

Therefore,

log

3

27

=

3

Even some seemingly more complicated logarithms can be evaluated without
a calculator. For example, let's evaluate log 2 3 4 9 mentally.

We ask, "To what exponent must

2

3

be raised in order to get

4

9

?

" We know

2

2

=

4

and

3

2

=

9

,

so

(

2

3

)

2

=

4

9

.

Therefore,

log

2

3

(

4

9

)

=

2\.

:::: {#fs-id1165137455840 .note}
::: title
:::

How To

*Given a logarithm of the form y= log b ( x ), evaluate it mentally.*

Rewrite the argument

x

as a power of

b

:

b

y

=

x

.

Use previous knowledge of powers of

b

identify

y

by asking, "To what exponent should

b

be raised in order to get

x

?

"
::::

::: {#Example_04_03_03 .example}
Solve y= log 4 ( 64 ) without using a calculator.

First we rewrite the logarithm in exponential form: 4 y =64. Next, we
ask, "To what exponent must 4 be raised in order to get 64?"

We know

$$4^{3} = 64$$

Therefore,

$$\log{{}_{4}^{}(64)} = 3$$
:::

:::: {#fs-id1165137731430 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Solve y= log 121 ( 11 ) without using a calculator.

log 121 ( 11 )= 1 2 (recalling that 121 = (121) 1 2 =11 )
::::

::: {#Example_04_03_04 .example}
Evaluate y= log 3 ( 1 27 ) without using a calculator.

First we rewrite the logarithm in exponential form: 3 y = 1 27 . Next,
we ask, "To what exponent must 3 be raised in order to get 1 27 ? "

We know 3 3 =27, but what must we do to get the reciprocal, 1 27 ?
Recall from working with exponents that b −a = 1 b a . We use this
information to write

$$\begin{array}{l}
{3^{- 3} = \frac{1}{3^{3}}} \\
{= \frac{1}{27}}
\end{array}$$

Therefore, log 3 ( 1 27 )=−3.
:::

:::: {#fs-id1165137575754 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Evaluate y= log 2 ( 1 32 ) without using a calculator.

log 2 ( 1 32 )=−5
::::

# Using Common Logarithms {#fs-id1165137547253}

Sometimes you may see a logarithm written without a base. When you see
one written this way, you need to look at the expression before
evaluating it. It may be that the base you use doesn\'t matter. If you
find it in computer science, it often means log2( x ) . However, in
mathematics it almost always means the common logarithm of 10. In other
words, the expression log( x ) often means log 10 ( x ).

:::: {#fs-id1165137401037 .note}
::: title
Definition of the Common Logarithm
:::

A common logarithm is a logarithm with base 10. We can also write log 10
( x ) simply as log( x ). The common logarithm of a positive number x
satisfies the following definition.

For x\>0,

$$y = \log(x)\mspace{9mu}\text{is~equivalent~to~}10^{y} = x$$

We read log( x ) as, "the logarithm with base 10 of x " or "log base 10
of x. "

The logarithm y is the exponent to which 10 must be raised to get x.
::::

Currently, we use log b ( x ) , lg (x) as the common logarithm, lb(x) as
the binary logarithm, and ln(x) as the natural logarithm. Writing lg(x)
without specifying a base is now considered bad form, despite being
frequently found in older materials.

:::: {#fs-id1165137579434 .note}
::: title
:::

How To

*Given a common logarithm of the form y=log( x ), evaluate it mentally.*

Rewrite the argument

x

as a power of

10

:

10

y

=

x

.

Use previous knowledge of powers of

10

to identify

y

by asking, "To what exponent must

10

be raised in order to get

x

?

"
::::

::: {#Example_04_03_05 .example}
Evaluate y=log(1000) without using a calculator.

First we rewrite the logarithm in exponential form: 10 y =1000. Next, we
ask, "To what exponent must 10 be raised in order to get 1000?" We know

$$10^{3} = 1000$$

Therefore, log( 1000 )=3.
:::

:::: {#fs-id1165135503827 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Evaluate y=log(1,000,000).

log(1,000,000)=6
::::

:::: {#fs-id1165137552804 .note}
::: title
:::

How To

*Given a common logarithm with the form y=log( x ), evaluate it using a
calculator.*

Press

\[LOG\]

.

Enter the value given for

x

,

followed by

\[ ) \]

.

Press

\[ENTER\]

.
::::

::: {#Example_04_03_06 .example}
Evaluate y=log( 321 ) to four decimal places using a calculator.

Press

\[LOG\]

.

Enter 321

,

followed by

\[ ) \]

.

Press

\[ENTER\]

.

Rounding to four decimal places, log( 321 )≈2.5065.

Note that 10 2 =100 and that 10 3 =1000. Since 321 is between 100 and
1000, we know that log( 321 ) must be between log( 100 ) and log( 1000
). This gives us the following:

$$\begin{matrix}
100 & < & 321 & < & 1000 \\
2 & < & 2.5065 & < & 3
\end{matrix}$$
:::

:::: {#fs-id1165137780842 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Evaluate y=log( 123 ) to four decimal places using a calculator.

log( 123 )≈2.0899
::::

::: {#Example_04_03_07 .example}
The amount of energy released from one earthquake was 500 times greater
than the amount of energy released from another. The equation 10 x =500
represents this situation, where x is the difference in magnitudes on
the Richter Scale. To the nearest thousandth, what was the difference in
magnitudes?

We begin by rewriting the exponential equation in logarithmic form.

$$\begin{array}{lll}
10^{x} & {= 500} & \\
{\log(500)} & {= x} & {\text{Use~the~definition~of~the~common~log}\text{.}}
\end{array}$$

Next we evaluate the logarithm using a calculator:

Press

\[LOG\]

.

Enter

500

,

followed by

\[ ) \]

.

Press

\[ENTER\]

.

To the nearest thousandth,

log

(

500

)

≈

2.699.

The difference in magnitudes was about 2.699.
:::

:::: {#fs-id1165137749635 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

The amount of energy released from one earthquake was 8,500 times
greater than the amount of energy released from another. The equation 10
x =8500 represents this situation, where x is the difference in
magnitudes on the Richter Scale. To the nearest thousandth, what was the
difference in magnitudes?

The difference in magnitudes was about 3.929.
::::

# Using Natural Logarithms {#fs-id1165137405741}

The most frequently used base for logarithms is e, the value of which is
approximately 2.71828. Base e logarithms are important in calculus and
some scientific applications; they are called *natural logarithms*. The
base e logarithm, log e ( x ), has its own notation, ln(x).

Most values of ln( x ) can be found only using a calculator. The major
exception is that, because the logarithm of 1 is always 0 in any base,
ln1=0. For other natural logarithms, we can use the ln key that can be
found on most scientific calculators. We can also find the natural
logarithm of any power of e using the inverse property of logarithms.

:::: {#fs-id1165137452317 .note}
::: title
Definition of the Natural Logarithm
:::

A natural logarithm is a logarithm with base e. We write log e ( x )
simply as ln( x ). The natural logarithm of a positive number x
satisfies the following definition.

For x\>0,

$$y = \ln(x)\mspace{9mu}\text{is~equivalent~to~}e^{y} = x$$

We read ln( x ) as, "the logarithm with base e of x " or "the natural
logarithm of x. "

The logarithm y is the exponent to which e must be raised to get x.

Since the functions y=e x and y=ln( x ) are inverse functions, ln( e x
)=x for all x and e = ln(x) x for x\>0.
::::

:::: {#fs-id1165137409558 .note}
::: title
:::

How To

*Given a natural logarithm with the form y=ln( x ), evaluate it using a
calculator.*

Press

\[LN\]

.

Enter the value given for

x

,

followed by

\[ ) \]

.

Press

\[ENTER\]

.
::::

::: {#Example_04_03_08 .example}
Evaluate y=ln( 500 ) to four decimal places using a calculator.

Press

\[LN\]

.

Enter

500

,

followed by

\[ ) \]

.

Press

\[ENTER\]

.

Rounding to four decimal places, ln(500)≈6.2146
:::

:::: {#fs-id1165137676028 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Evaluate ln(−500).

It is not possible to take the logarithm of a negative number in the set
of real numbers.
::::

:::: {#fs-id1165137648012 .note}
::: title
:::

Media

Access this online resource for additional instruction and practice with
logarithms.

Introduction to Logarithms
::::

# Key Equations {#fs-id1165137870892}

  ---------------------------------------- -----------------------------------------------------------
  Definition of the logarithmic function   For  x\>0,b\>0,b≠1, y= log b ( x ) if and only if b y =x.
  Definition of the common logarithm       For x\>0, y=log( x ) if and only if 10 y =x.
  Definition of the natural logarithm      For x\>0, y=ln( x ) if and only if e y =x.
  ---------------------------------------- -----------------------------------------------------------

# Key Concepts {#fs-id1165135699130}

The inverse of an exponential function is a logarithmic function, and
the inverse of a logarithmic function is an exponential function.

Logarithmic equations can be written in an equivalent exponential form,
using the definition of a logarithm. See

.

Exponential equations can be written in their equivalent logarithmic
form using the definition of a logarithm See

.

Logarithmic functions with base

b

can be evaluated mentally using previous knowledge of powers of

b

.

See

and

.

Common logarithms can be evaluated mentally using previous knowledge of
powers of

10\.

See

.

When common logarithms cannot be evaluated mentally, a calculator can be
used. See

.

Real-world exponential problems with base

10

can be rewritten as a common logarithm and then evaluated using a
calculator. See

.

Natural logarithms can be evaluated using a calculator

.

# Section Exercises {#fs-id1165135192789}

## Verbal {#fs-id1165137427076}

What is a base b logarithm? Discuss the meaning by interpreting each
part of the equivalent equations b y =x and log b x=y for b\>0,b≠1.

A logarithm is an exponent. Specifically, it is the exponent to which a
base b is raised to produce a given value. In the expressions given, the
base b has the same value. The exponent, y, in the expression b y can
also be written as the logarithm, log b x, and the value of x is the
result of raising b to the power of y.

How is the logarithmic function f(x)= log b x related to the exponential
function g(x)= b x ? What is the result of composing these two
functions?

How can the logarithmic equation log b x=y be solved for x using the
properties of exponents?

Since the equation of a logarithm is equivalent to an exponential
equation, the logarithm can be converted to the exponential equation b y
=x, and then properties of exponents can be applied to solve for x.

Discuss the meaning of the common logarithm. What is its relationship to
a logarithm with base b, and how does the notation differ?

Discuss the meaning of the natural logarithm. What is its relationship
to a logarithm with base b, and how does the notation differ?

The natural logarithm is a special case of the logarithm with base b in
that the natural log always has base e. Rather than notating the natural
logarithm as log e ( x ), the notation used is ln( x ).

## Algebraic {#fs-id1165137447239}

For the following exercises, rewrite each equation in exponential form.

log 4 (q)=m

log a (b)=c

a c =b

log 16 ( y )=x

log x ( 64 )=y

x y =64

log y ( x )=−11

log 15 ( a )=b

15 b =a

log y ( 137 )=x

log 13 ( 142 )=a

13 a =142

log(v)=t

ln(w)=n

e n =w

For the following exercises, rewrite each equation in logarithmic form.

4 x =y

c d =k

log c (k)=d

m −7 =n

19 x =y

log 19 y=x

x − 10 13 =y

n 4 =103

log n ( 103 )=4

( 7 5 ) m =n

y x = 39 100

log y ( 39 100 )=x

10 a =b

e k =h

ln(h)=k

For the following exercises, solve for x by converting the logarithmic
equation to exponential form.

log 3 (x)=2

log 2 (x)=−3

x= 2 −3 = 1 8

log 5 (x)=2

log 3 ( x )=3

x= 3 3 =27

log 2 (x)=6

log 9 (x)= 1 2

x= 9 1 2 =3

log 18 (x)=2

log 6 ( x )=−3

x= 6 −3 = 1 216

log(x)=3

ln(x)=2

x= e 2

For the following exercises, use the definition of common and natural
logarithms to simplify.

log( 100 8 )

10 log(32)

32

2log(.0001)

e ln( 1.06 )

1.06

ln( e −5.03 )

e ln( 10.125 ) +4

14.125

## Numeric {#fs-id1165137451809}

For the following exercises, evaluate the base b logarithmic expression
without using a calculator.

log 3 ( 1 27 )

log 6 ( 6 )

1 2

log 2 ( 1 8 )+4

6 log 8 (4)

4

For the following exercises, evaluate the common logarithmic expression
without using a calculator.

log(10,000)

log(0.001)

−3

log(1)+7

2log( 100 −3 )

−12

For the following exercises, evaluate the natural logarithmic expression
without using a calculator.

ln( e 1 3 )

ln(1)

0

ln( e −0.225 )−3

25ln( e 2 5 )

10

## Technology {#fs-id1165137527430}

For the following exercises, evaluate each expression using a
calculator. Round to the nearest thousandth.

log(0.04)

ln(15)

2.708

ln( 4 5 )

log( 2 )

0.151

ln( 2 )

## Extensions {#fs-id1165137932472}

Is x=0 in the domain of the function f(x)=log(x)? If so, what is the
value of the function when x=0? Verify the result.

No, the function has no defined value for x=0. To verify, suppose x=0 is
in the domain of the function f(x)=log(x). Then there is some number n
such that n=log(0). Rewriting as an exponential equation gives: 10 n =0,
which is impossible since no such real number n exists. Therefore, x=0
is *not* the domain of the function f(x)=log(x).

Is f(x)=0 in the range of the function f(x)=log(x)? If so, for what
value of x? Verify the result.

Is there a number x such that lnx=2? If so, what is that number? Verify
the result.

Yes. Suppose there exists a real number x such that lnx=2. Rewriting as
an exponential equation gives x= e 2 , which is a real number. To
verify, let x= e 2 . Then, by definition, ln( x )=ln( e 2 )=2.

Is the following true: log 3 (27) log 4 ( 1 64 ) =−1? Verify the result.

Is the following true: ln( e 1.725 ) ln( 1 ) =1.725? Verify the result.

No; ln( 1 )=0, so ln( e 1.725 ) ln( 1 ) is undefined.

## Real-World Applications {#fs-id1165135437184}

The exposure index EI for a camera is a measurement of the amount of
light that hits the image receptor. It is determined by the equation EI=
log 2 ( f 2 t ), where f is the "f-stop" setting on the camera, and t is
the exposure time in seconds. Suppose the f-stop setting is 8 and the
desired exposure time is 2 seconds. What will the resulting exposure
index be?

Refer to the previous exercise. Suppose the light meter on a camera
indicates an EI of −2, and the desired exposure time is 16 seconds. What
should the f-stop setting be?

2

The intensity levels *I* of two earthquakes measured on a seismograph
can be compared by the formula log I 1 I 2 = M 1 − M 2 where M is the
magnitude given by the Richter Scale. In August 2009, an earthquake of
magnitude 6.1 hit Honshu, Japan. In March 2011, that same region
experienced yet another, more devastating earthquake, this time with a
magnitude of 9.0.[^5] How many times greater was the intensity of the
2011 earthquake? Round to the nearest whole number.

# 

common logarithm

the exponent to which 10 must be raised to get

x

;

log

10

(

x

)

is written simply as

log

(

x

)

.

logarithm

the exponent to which

b

must be raised to get

x

;

written

y

=

log

b

(

x

)

natural logarithm

the exponent to which the number

e

must be raised to get

x

;

log

e

(

x

)

is written as

ln

(

x

)

.

[^1]: http://earthquake.usgs.gov/earthquakes/eqinthenews/2010/us2010rja6/#summary.
    Accessed 3/4/2013.

[^2]: http://earthquake.usgs.gov/earthquakes/eqinthenews/2011/usc0001xgp/#summary.
    Accessed 3/4/2013.

[^3]: http://earthquake.usgs.gov/earthquakes/eqinthenews/2010/us2010rja6/.
    Accessed 3/4/2013.

[^4]: http://earthquake.usgs.gov/earthquakes/eqinthenews/2011/usc0001xgp/#details.
    Accessed 3/4/2013.

[^5]: http://earthquake.usgs.gov/earthquakes/world/historical.php.
    Accessed 3/4/2014.
