m49364

> In this section, you will:
>
> Identify the domain of a logarithmic function.
>
> Graph logarithmic functions.

44418435-ed46-454a-aba4-cd57f5266654

#  {#eip-434}

## Learning Objectives {#fs-idm499751632}

Find the domain and range of a relation and a function. (IA 3.5.1)

Graph Logarithmic functions. (IA 10.3.3)

## Objective 1: Find the domain and range of a relation and a function. (IA 3.5.1) {#eip-713}

:::: {#eip-40 .note}
::: title
Vocabulary
:::

Fill in the blanks:

The

domain

of a releation or a function is \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_.

The

range

of a releation or a function is \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_.
::::

::: {#eip-150 .example}
Find the domain and range of a relation and a function.

ⓐ

ⓑ

ⓒ

Find the domain of the function f(x)=5x-2

ⓓ

Find the domain of the function f(x)=log2(x-5) .

ⓐ

The set of points on the graph is {(-4,-2),(-2,-1),(-1,1),(1,2)} The
Domain is the set of all x-coordinates: {-4,-2,-1,1} The Range is the
set of all y-coordinates: {-2,-1,1} *Notice* that even though
y-coodinate of 1 appears twice, we only list it once.

ⓑ

Domain: (-∞,∞) Range: \[-2,∞) *Notice* that -2 is included because the
point (3,-2) is on the graph of a function.

ⓒ

A function is not defined when the denominator is zero. We need to set
the denominator equal zero and exclude this value(s) from the domain.
x-2=0, x=2, Domain (-∞,2)∪(2,∞) *Notice* that 2 is excluded from the
domain because the function is not defined at x=2

ⓓ

From the definition of the logarithmic function f(x)=logax we know that
x\>0 To find domain of f(x)=log2(x-5 , we need to set up and solve
inequality. x-5\>0 , x\>5) Domain: (5,∞)
:::

### Practice Makes Perfect {#eip-738}

Find the domain and range of a relation and a function.

Find the domain and range of a relation.

Find the domain and the range of the function graphed. Use interval
notation.

Find the domain of the function f(x)=log2(x+4) . Notice: this is the
same function that was graphed in question 2.

## Objective 2: Graph Logarithmic functions. (IA 10.3.3) {#eip-297}

To graph a logarithmic function y=logax  , it is easiest to convert the
equation to its exponential form, x=ay . Generally, when we look for
ordered pairs for the graph of a function, we usually choose an x-value
and then determine its corresponding y-value. In this case you may find
it easier to choose y-values and then determine its corresponding
x-value.

::: {#eip-295 .example}
Graph Logarithmic functions.

Graph y=log2x.

To graph the function, we will first rewrite the logarithmic equation,
y=log2x, in exponential form, 2y=x.

We will use point plotting to graph the function. It will be easier to
start with values of *y* and then get *x*.

  y    2y=x         (x,y)
  ---- ------------ ---------
  −2   2−2=122=14   (14,2)
  −1   2−1=121=12   (12,−1)
  0    20=1         (1,0)
  1    21=2         (2,1)
  2    22=4         (4,2)
  3    23=8         (8,3)
:::

### Practice Makes Perfect {#eip-820}

Graph Logarithmic functions

Graph y=log3x and y=log5x in the same coordinate system.

  --- ------ -------
  y   3y=x   (x,y)
             
             
             
             
             
             
  y   5y=x   (x,y)
             
             
             
             
             
             
             
  --- ------ -------

Graph y=log1/3x 

  --- --------- -------
  y   (13)y=x   (x,y)
                
                
                
                
                
                
                
  --- --------- -------

Do the graphs of y=log2x , y=log3x , and y=log5x have the shape we
expect from a logarithmic function where a\>0 ? (Remember a is the base
of the log function)

Is there a point they all share? Why does this make sense?

Do they all have a point (a,1) ? Why does this make sense?

Do they all have a point (1a,-1) ? Why does this make sense?

Do they all have the same vertical asymptote? What is the equation of
the vertical asymptote?

Do they all have the same domain? Write the domain in the interval
notation.

Do they all have the same range? Write the range in the interval
notation.

In [Graphs of Exponential Functions](#), we saw how creating a graphical
representation of an exponential model gives us another layer of insight
for predicting future events. How do logarithmic graphs give us insight
into situations? Because every logarithmic function is the inverse
function of an exponential function, we can think of every output on a
logarithmic graph as the input for the corresponding inverse exponential
equation. In other words, logarithms give the *cause* for an *effect*.

To illustrate, suppose we invest \$2500 in an account that offers an
annual interest rate of 5%, compounded continuously. We already know
that the balance in our account for any year t can be found with the
equation A=2500 e 0.05t .

But what if we wanted to know the year for any balance? We would need to
create a corresponding new function by interchanging the input and the
output; thus we would need to create a logarithmic model for this
situation. By graphing the model, we can see the output (year) for any
input (account balance). For instance, what if we wanted to know how
many years it would take for our initial investment to double? [\#](#)
shows this point on the logarithmic graph.

<figure id="CNX_Precalc_Figure_04_04_001">

</figure>

In this section we will discuss the values for which a logarithmic
function is defined, and then turn our attention to graphing the family
of logarithmic functions.

# Finding the Domain of a Logarithmic Function {#fs-id1165137923503}

Before working with graphs, we will take a look at the domain (the set
of input values) for which the logarithmic function is defined.

Recall that the exponential function is defined as y= b x for any real
number x and constant b\>0, b≠1, where

The domain of

y

is

(

−

∞

,

∞

)

.

The range of

y

is

(

0

,

∞

)

.

In the last section we learned that the logarithmic function y= log b (
x ) is the inverse of the exponential function y= b x . So, as inverse
functions:

The domain of

y

=

log

b

(

x

)

is the range of

y

=

b

x

:

(

0

,

∞

)

.

The range of

y

=

log

b

(

x

)

is the domain of

y

=

b

x

:

(

−

∞

,

∞

)

.

Transformations of the parent function y= log b ( x ) behave similarly
to those of other functions. Just as with other parent functions, we can
apply the four types of transformations---shifts, stretches,
compressions, and reflections.

In [Graphs of Exponential Functions](#) we saw that certain
transformations can change the *range* of y= b x . Similarly, applying
transformations to the parent function y= log b ( x ) can change the
*domain*. When finding the domain of a logarithmic function, therefore,
it is important to remember that the domain consists *only of positive
real numbers*. That is, the argument of the logarithmic function must be
greater than zero.

For example, consider f(x)= log 4 ( 2x−3 ). This function is defined for
any values of x such that the argument, in this case 2x−3, is greater
than zero. To find the domain, we set up an inequality and solve for x:

$$\begin{array}{ll}
{2x - 3 > 0} & {\text{Show~the~argument~greater~than~zero}.} \\
{\mspace{9mu}\mspace{9mu}\mspace{9mu}\mspace{9mu}\mspace{9mu}\mspace{9mu}\mspace{9mu}\mspace{9mu}\mspace{9mu}\mspace{9mu} 2x > 3} & {\text{Add~3}.} \\
{\mspace{9mu}\mspace{9mu}\mspace{9mu}\mspace{9mu}\mspace{9mu}\mspace{9mu}\mspace{9mu}\mspace{9mu}\mspace{9mu}\mspace{9mu}\mspace{9mu}\mspace{9mu}\mspace{9mu} x > 1.5\begin{array}{llll}
 & & & 
\end{array}} & {\text{Divide~by~2}.}
\end{array}$$

In interval notation, the domain of f(x)= log 4 ( 2x−3 ) is ( 1.5,∞ ).

:::: {#fs-id1165137423048 .note}
::: title
:::

How To

*Given a logarithmic function, identify the domain.*

Set up an inequality showing the argument greater than zero.

Solve for

x

.

Write the domain in interval notation.
::::

::: {#Example_04_04_01 .example}
What is the domain of f(x)= log 2 (x+3)?

The logarithmic function is defined only when the input is positive, so
this function is defined when x+3\>0. Solving this inequality,

$$\begin{array}{ll}
{x + 3 > 0} & {\text{The~input~must~be~positive}.} \\
{x > - 3\begin{array}{llll}
 & & & 
\end{array}} & {\text{Subtract~3}.}
\end{array}$$

The domain of f(x)= log 2 (x+3) is ( −3,∞ ).
:::

:::: {#fs-id1165135692225 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

What is the domain of f(x)= log 5 (x−2)+1?

( 2,∞ )
::::

::: {#Example_04_04_02 .example}
What is the domain of f(x)=log(5−2x)?

The logarithmic function is defined only when the input is positive, so
this function is defined when 5--2x\>0. Solving this inequality,

$$\begin{array}{ll}
{5 - 2x > 0} & {\text{The~input~must~be~positive}.} \\
{- 2x > - 5} & {\text{Subtract~}5.} \\
{x < \frac{5}{2}\begin{array}{llll}
 & & & 
\end{array}} & {\text{Divide~by~} - 2\mspace{9mu}\text{and~switch~the~inequality}.}
\end{array}$$

The domain of f(x)=log(5−2x) is ( --∞, 5 2 ).
:::

:::: {#fs-id1165137874699 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

What is the domain of f(x)=log(x−5)+2?

( 5,∞ )
::::

# Graphing Logarithmic Functions {#fs-id1165137554026}

Now that we have a feel for the set of values for which a logarithmic
function is defined, we move on to graphing logarithmic functions. The
family of logarithmic functions includes the parent function y= log b (
x ) along with all its transformations: shifts, stretches, compressions,
and reflections.

We begin with the parent function y= log b ( x ). Because every
logarithmic function of this form is the inverse of an exponential
function with the form y= b x , their graphs will be reflections of each
other across the line y=x. To illustrate this, we can observe the
relationship between the input and output values of y= 2 x and its
equivalent x= log 2 (y) in [\#](#)*.*

  ------------------- ----- ----- ----- --- --- --- ---
  *x*                 −3    −2    −1    0   1   2   3
  *2 x =y*            1 8   1 4   1 2   1   2   4   8
  *log 2 ( y )=x*     −3    −2    −1    0   1   2   3
  ------------------- ----- ----- ----- --- --- --- ---

Using the inputs and outputs from [\#](#), we can build another table to
observe the relationship between points on the graphs of the inverse
functions f(x)= 2 x and g(x)= log 2 (x). See [\#](#)*.*

  ----------------------- ------------- ------------- ------------- --------- --------- --------- ---------
  *f(x)= 2 x*             ( −3, 1 8 )   ( −2, 1 4 )   ( −1, 1 2 )   ( 0,1 )   ( 1,2 )   ( 2,4 )   ( 3,8 )
  *g(x)= log 2 ( x )*     ( 1 8 ,−3 )   ( 1 4 ,−2 )   ( 1 2 ,−1 )   ( 1,0 )   ( 2,1 )   ( 4,2 )   ( 8,3 )
  ----------------------- ------------- ------------- ------------- --------- --------- --------- ---------

As we'd expect, the *x*- and *y*-coordinates are reversed for the
inverse functions. [\#](#) shows the graph of f and g.

<figure id="CNX_Precalc_Figure_04_04_002">

</figure>

Observe the following from the graph:

f

(

x

)

=

2

x

has a

y

-intercept at

(

0

,

1

)

and

g

(

x

)

=

log

2

(

x

)

has an

x

\- intercept at

(

1

,

0

)

.

The domain of

f

(

x

)

=

2

x

,

(

−

∞

,

∞

)

,

is the same as the range of

g

(

x

)

=

log

2

(

x

)

.

The range of

f

(

x

)

=

2

x

,

(

0

,

∞

)

,

is the same as the domain of

g

(

x

)

=

log

2

(

x

)

.

:::: {#fs-id1165137780760 .note}
::: title
Characteristics of the Graph of the Parent Function, f(x)= log b ( x ):
:::

For any real number x and constant b\>0, b≠1, we can see the following
characteristics in the graph of f(x)= log b ( x ):

one-to-one function

vertical asymptote:

x

=

0

domain:

(

0

,

∞

)

range:

(

−

∞

,

∞

)

x-

intercept:

(

1

,

0

)

and key point

(

b

,

1

)

y

-intercept: none

increasing if

b

\>

1

decreasing if

0

\<

b

\<

1

See [\#](#).

<figure id="CNX_Precalc_Figure_04_04_003">

</figure>

[\#](#) shows how changing the base b in f(x)= log b ( x ) can affect
the graphs. Observe that the graphs compress vertically as the value of
the base increases. (*Note:* recall that the function ln( x ) has base
e≈2.718.)

<figure id="CNX_Precalc_Figure_04_04_004">

</figure>
::::

:::: {#fs-id1165137871937 .note}
::: title
:::

How To

*Given a logarithmic function with the form f(x)= log b ( x ), graph the
function.*

Draw and label the vertical asymptote,

x

=

0\.

Plot the

x-

intercept,

(

1

,

0

)

.

Plot the key point

(

b

,

1

)

.

Draw a smooth curve through the points.

State the domain,

(

0

,

∞

)

,

the range,

(

−

∞

,

∞

)

,

and the vertical asymptote,

x

=

0\.
::::

::: {#Example_04_04_03 .example}
Graph f(x)= log 5 ( x ). State the domain, range, and asymptote.

Before graphing, identify the behavior and key points for the graph.

Since

b

=

5

is greater than one, we know the function is increasing. The left tail
of the graph will approach the vertical asymptote

x

=

0

,

and the right tail will increase slowly without bound.

The

x

-intercept is

(

1

,

0

)

.

The key point

(

5

,

1

)

is on the graph.

We draw and label the asymptote, plot and label the points, and draw a
smooth curve through the points (see

).

<figure id="CNX_Precalc_Figure_04_04_005">

</figure>

The domain is ( 0,∞ ), the range is ( −∞,∞ ), and the vertical asymptote
is x=0.
:::

:::: {#fs-id1165135161300 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Graph f(x)= log 1 5 (x). State the domain, range, and asymptote.

The domain is ( 0,∞ ), the range is ( −∞,∞ ), and the vertical asymptote
is x=0.
::::

# Graphing Transformations of Logarithmic Functions {#fs-id1165137430980}

As we mentioned in the beginning of the section, transformations of
logarithmic graphs behave similarly to those of other parent functions.
We can shift, stretch, compress, and reflect the parent function y= log
b ( x ) without loss of shape.

## Graphing a Horizontal Shift of *f*(*x*) = log*b*(*x*) {#fs-id1165137734884}

When a constant c is added to the input of the parent function f(x)=lo g
b (x), the result is a horizontal shift c units in the *opposite*
direction of the sign on c. To visualize horizontal shifts, we can
observe the general graph of the parent function f(x)= log b ( x ) and
for c\>0 alongside the shift left, g(x)= log b ( x+c ), and the shift
right, h(x)= log b ( x−c ). See [\#](#).

<figure id="Figure_04_04_007">

</figure>

:::: {#fs-id1165135296307 .note}
::: title
Horizontal Shifts of the Parent Function f(x)= log b ( x )
:::

For any constant c, the function f(x)= log b ( x+c )

shifts the parent function

y

=

log

b

(

x

)

left

c

units if

c

\>

0\.

shifts the parent function

y

=

log

b

(

x

)

right

c

units if

c

\<

0\.

has the vertical asymptote

x

=

−

c

.

has domain

(

−

c

,

∞

)

.

has range

(

−

∞

,

∞

)

.
::::

:::: {#fs-id1165137641710 .note}
::: title
:::

How To

*Given a logarithmic function with the form f(x)= log b ( x+c ), graph
the translation.*

Identify the horizontal shift:

If

c

\>

0

,

shift the graph of

f

(

x

)

=

log

b

(

x

)

left

c

units.

If

c

\<

0

,

shift the graph of

f

(

x

)

=

log

b

(

x

)

right

c

units.

Draw the vertical asymptote

x

=

−

c

.

Identify three key points from the parent function. Find new coordinates
for the shifted functions by subtracting

c

from the

x

coordinate.

Label the three points.

The Domain is

(

−

c

,

∞

)

,

the range is

(

−

∞

,

∞

)

,

and the vertical asymptote is

x

=

−

c

.
::::

::: {#Example_04_04_04 .example}
Sketch the horizontal shift f(x)= log 3 (x−2) alongside its parent
function. Include the key points and asymptotes on the graph. State the
domain, range, and asymptote.

Since the function is f(x)= log 3 (x−2), we notice x+( −2 )=x--2.

Thus c=−2, so c\<0. This means we will shift the function f(x)= log 3
(x) right 2 units.

The vertical asymptote is x=−(−2) or x=2.

Consider the three key points from the parent function, ( 1 3 ,−1 ), (
1,0 ), and ( 3,1 ).

The new coordinates are found by adding 2 to the x coordinates.

Label the points ( 7 3 ,−1 ), ( 3,0 ), and ( 5,1 ).

The domain is ( 2,∞ ), the range is ( −∞,∞ ), and the vertical asymptote
is x=2.

<figure id="CNX_Precalc_Figure_04_04_008">

</figure>
:::

:::: {#fs-id1165137831972 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Sketch a graph of f(x)= log 3 (x+4) alongside its parent function.
Include the key points and asymptotes on the graph. State the domain,
range, and asymptote.

The domain is ( −4,∞ ), the range ( −∞,∞ ), and the asymptote x=--4.
::::

## Graphing a Vertical Shift of *y* = log*b*(*x*) {#fs-id1165135403538}

When a constant d is added to the parent function f(x)= log b ( x ), the
result is a vertical shift d units in the direction of the sign on d. To
visualize vertical shifts, we can observe the general graph of the
parent function f(x)= log b ( x ) alongside the shift up, g(x)= log b (
x )+d and the shift down, h(x)= log b ( x )−d. See [\#](#).

<figure id="Figure_04_04_010">

</figure>

:::: {#fs-id1165137767601 .note}
::: title
Vertical Shifts of the Parent Function y= log b ( x )
:::

For any constant d, the function f(x)= log b ( x )+d

shifts the parent function

y

=

log

b

(

x

)

up

d

units if

d

\>

0\.

shifts the parent function

y

=

log

b

(

x

)

down

d

units if

d

\<

0\.

has the vertical asymptote

x

=

0\.

has domain

(

0

,

∞

)

.

has range

(

−

∞

,

∞

)

.
::::

:::: {#fs-id1165137706002 .note}
::: title
:::

How To

*Given a logarithmic function with the form f(x)= log b ( x )+d, graph
the translation.*

Identify the vertical shift:

If

d

\>

0

,

shift the graph of

f

(

x

)

=

log

b

(

x

)

up

d

units.

If

d

\<

0

,

shift the graph of

f

(

x

)

=

log

b

(

x

)

down

d

units.

Draw the vertical asymptote

x

=

0\.

Identify three key points from the parent function. Find new coordinates
for the shifted functions by adding

d

to the

y

coordinate.

Label the three points.

The domain is

(

0,

∞

)

,

the range is

(

−

∞

,

∞

)

,

and the vertical asymptote is

x

=

0\.
::::

::: {#Example_04_04_05 .example}
Sketch a graph of f(x)= log 3 (x)−2 alongside its parent function.
Include the key points and asymptote on the graph. State the domain,
range, and asymptote.

Since the function is f(x)= log 3 (x)−2, we will notice d=--2. Thus
d\<0.

This means we will shift the function f(x)= log 3 (x) down 2 units.

The vertical asymptote is x=0.

Consider the three key points from the parent function, ( 1 3 ,−1 ), (
1,0 ), and ( 3,1 ).

The new coordinates are found by subtracting 2 from the *y* coordinates.

Label the points ( 1 3 ,−3 ), ( 1,−2 ), and ( 3,−1 ).

The domain is ( 0,∞ ), the range is ( −∞,∞ ), and the vertical asymptote
is x=0.

<figure id="CNX_Precalc_Figure_04_04_011">

</figure>

The domain is ( 0,∞ ), the range is ( −∞,∞ ), and the vertical asymptote
is x=0.
:::

:::: {#fs-id1165135176716 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Sketch a graph of f(x)= log 2 (x)+2 alongside its parent function.
Include the key points and asymptote on the graph. State the domain,
range, and asymptote.

The domain is ( 0,∞ ), the range is ( −∞,∞ ), and the vertical asymptote
is x=0.
::::

## Graphing Stretches and Compressions of *y* = log*b*(*x*) {#fs-id1165137770245}

When the parent function f(x)= log b ( x ) is multiplied by a constant
a\>0, the result is a vertical stretch or compression of the original
graph. To visualize stretches and compressions, we set a\>1 and observe
the general graph of the parent function f(x)= log b ( x ) alongside the
vertical stretch, g(x)=a log b ( x ) and the vertical compression, h(x)=
1 a log b ( x ). See [\#](#).

<figure id="Figure_04_04_013">

</figure>

:::: {#fs-id1165137433996 .note}
::: title
Vertical Stretches and Compressions of the Parent Function y= log b ( x
)
:::

For any constant a\>1, the function f(x)=a log b ( x )

stretches the parent function

y

=

log

b

(

x

)

vertically by a factor of

a

if

a

\>

1\.

compresses the parent function

y

=

log

b

(

x

)

vertically by a factor of

a

if

0

\<

a

\<

1\.

has the vertical asymptote

x

=

0\.

has the

x

-intercept

(

1

,

0

)

.

has domain

(

0

,

∞

)

.

has range

(

−

∞

,

∞

)

.
::::

:::: {#fs-id1165135169301 .note}
::: title
:::

How To

*Given a logarithmic function with the form f(x)=a log b ( x ), a\>0,
graph the translation.*

Identify the vertical stretch or compressions:

If

\|

a

\|

\>

1

,

the graph of

f

(

x

)

=

log

b

(

x

)

is stretched by a factor of

a

units.

If

\|

a

\|

\<

1

,

the graph of

f

(

x

)

=

log

b

(

x

)

is compressed by a factor of

a

units.

Draw the vertical asymptote

x

=

0\.

Identify three key points from the parent function. Find new coordinates
for the shifted functions by multiplying the

y

coordinates by

a

.

Label the three points.

The domain is

(

0

,

∞

)

,

the range is

(

−

∞

,

∞

)

,

and the vertical asymptote is

x

=

0\.
::::

::: {#Example_04_04_06 .example}
Sketch a graph of f(x)=2 log 4 (x) alongside its parent function.
Include the key points and asymptote on the graph. State the domain,
range, and asymptote.

Since the function is f(x)=2 log 4 (x), we will notice a=2.

This means we will stretch the function f(x)= log 4 (x) by a factor of
2.

The vertical asymptote is x=0.

Consider the three key points from the parent function, ( 1 4 ,−1 ), (
1,0 ), and ( 4,1 ).

The new coordinates are found by multiplying the y coordinates by 2.

Label the points ( 1 4 ,−2 ), ( 1,0 ), and ( 4,2 ).

The domain is ( 0,∞ ), the range is ( −∞,∞ ), and the vertical asymptote
is x=0. See [\#](#)*.*

<figure id="CNX_Precalc_Figure_04_04_014">

</figure>

The domain is ( 0,∞ ), the range is ( −∞,∞ ), and the vertical asymptote
is x=0.
:::

:::: {#fs-id1165134079655 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Sketch a graph of f(x)= 1 2 log 4 (x) alongside its parent function.
Include the key points and asymptote on the graph. State the domain,
range, and asymptote.

The domain is ( 0,∞ ), the range is ( −∞,∞ ), and the vertical asymptote
is x=0.
::::

::: {#Example_04_04_07 .example}
Sketch a graph of f(x)=5log(x+2). State the domain, range, and
asymptote.

Remember: what happens inside parentheses happens first. First, we move
the graph left 2 units, then stretch the function vertically by a factor
of 5, as in [\#](#). The vertical asymptote will be shifted to x=−2. The
*x*-intercept will be (−1,0). The domain will be ( −2,∞ ). Two points
will help give the shape of the graph: (−1,0) and (8,5). We chose x=8 as
the *x*-coordinate of one point to graph because when x=8, x+2=10, the
base of the common logarithm.

<figure id="CNX_Precalc_Figure_04_04_016">

</figure>

The domain is ( −2,∞ ), the range is ( −∞,∞ ), and the vertical
asymptote is x=−2.
:::

:::: {#fs-id1165135560730 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Sketch a graph of the function f(x)=3log(x−2)+1. State the domain,
range, and asymptote.

The domain is ( 2,∞ ), the range is ( −∞,∞ ), and the vertical asymptote
is x=2.
::::

## Graphing Reflections of *f*(*x*) = log*b*(*x*) {#fs-id1165137629003}

When the parent function f(x)= log b ( x ) is multiplied by −1, the
result is a reflection about the *x*-axis. When the *input* is
multiplied by −1, the result is a reflection about the *y*-axis. To
visualize reflections, we restrict b\>1, and observe the general graph
of the parent function f(x)= log b ( x ) alongside the reflection about
the *x*-axis, g(x)= −log b ( x ) and the reflection about the *y*-axis,
h(x)= log b ( −x ).

<figure id="Figure_04_04_018">

</figure>

:::: {#fs-id1165135190744 .note}
::: title
Reflections of the Parent Function y= log b ( x )
:::

The function f(x)= −log b ( x )

reflects the parent function

y

=

log

b

(

x

)

about the

x

-axis.

has domain,

(

0

,

∞

)

,

range,

(

−

∞

,

∞

)

,

and vertical asymptote,

x

=

0

,

which are unchanged from the parent function.

The function f(x)= log b ( −x )

reflects the parent function

y

=

log

b

(

x

)

about the

y

-axis.

has domain

(

−

∞

,

0

)

.

has range,

(

−

∞

,

∞

)

,

and vertical asymptote,

x

=

0

,

which are unchanged from the parent function.
::::

:::: {#fs-id1165137638830 .note}
::: title
:::

How To

*Given a logarithmic function with the parent function f(x)= log b ( x
), graph a translation.*

  If f(x)=− log b (x)                                                                  If f(x)= log b (−x)
  ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  1\. Draw the vertical asymptote, x=0.                                                1\. Draw the vertical asymptote, x=0.
  2\. Plot the *x-*intercept, ( 1,0 ).                                                 2\. Plot the *x-*intercept, ( 1,0 ).
  3\. Reflect the graph of the parent function f(x)= log b ( x ) about the *x*-axis.   3\. Reflect the graph of the parent function f(x)= log b ( x ) about the *y*-axis.
  4\. Draw a smooth curve through the points.                                          4\. Draw a smooth curve through the points.
  5\. State the domain, (0, ∞), the range, (−∞, ∞), and the vertical asymptote x=0 .   5\. State the domain, (−∞, 0) the range, (−∞, ∞) and the vertical asymptote x=0.
::::

::: {#Example_04_04_08 .example}
Sketch a graph of f(x)=log(−x) alongside its parent function. Include
the key points and asymptote on the graph. State the domain, range, and
asymptote.

Before graphing f(x)=log(−x), identify the behavior and key points for
the graph.

Since

b

=

10

is greater than one, we know that the parent function is increasing.
Since the

input

value is multiplied by

−1

,

f

is a reflection of the parent graph about the

y-

axis. Thus,

f

(

x

)

=

log

(

−

x

)

will be decreasing as

x

moves from negative infinity to zero, and the right tail of the graph
will approach the vertical asymptote

x

=

0\.

The

x

-intercept is

(

−1

,

0

)

.

We draw and label the asymptote, plot and label the points, and draw a
smooth curve through the points.

<figure id="CNX_Precalc_Figure_04_04_019">

</figure>

The domain is ( −∞,0 ), the range is ( −∞,∞ ), and the vertical
asymptote is x=0.
:::

:::: {#fs-id1165135650792 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Graph f(x)=−log(−x). State the domain, range, and asymptote.

The domain is ( −∞,0 ), the range is ( −∞,∞ ), and the vertical
asymptote is x=0.
::::

:::: {#fs-id1165134579621 .note}
::: title
:::

How To

*Given a logarithmic equation, use a graphing calculator to approximate
solutions.*

Press

\[Y=\]

. Enter the given logarithm equation or equations as

Y

1

=

and, if needed,

Y

2

=

.

Press

\[GRAPH\]

to observe the graphs of the curves and use

\[WINDOW\]

to find an appropriate view of the graphs, including their point(s) of
intersection.

To find the value of

x

,

we compute the point of intersection. Press

\[2ND\]

then

\[CALC\]

. Select "intersect" and press

\[ENTER\]

three times. The point of intersection gives the value of

x

,

for the point(s) of intersection.
::::

::: {#Example_04_04_09 .example}
Solve 4ln( x )+1=−2ln( x−1 ) graphically. Round to the nearest
thousandth.

Press *\[Y=\]* and enter 4ln( x )+1 next to *Y1*=. Then enter −2ln( x−1
) next to *Y2=*. For a window, use the values 0 to 5 for x and --10 to
10 for y. Press *\[GRAPH\]*. The graphs should intersect somewhere a
little to right of x=1.

For a better approximation, press *\[2ND\]* then *\[CALC\]*. Select
*\[5: intersect\]* and press *\[ENTER\]* three times. The *x*-coordinate
of the point of intersection is displayed as 1.3385297. (Your answer may
be different if you use a different window or use a different value for
*Guess?*) So, to the nearest thousandth, x≈1.339.
:::

:::: {#fs-id1165137891344 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Solve 5log( x+2 )=4−log( x ) graphically. Round to the nearest
thousandth.

x≈3.049
::::

## Summarizing Translations of the Logarithmic Function {#fs-id1165135528930}

Now that we have worked with each type of translation for the
logarithmic function, we can summarize each in [\#](#) to arrive at the
general equation for translating exponential functions.

+----------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Transformations of the Parent Function y= log b ( x )                |
+----------------------------------------+-----------------------------+
| Transformation                         | Form                        |
+========================================+=============================+
| Shift Horizontally c units to the left | y= log b ( x+c )+d          |
| Vertically d units up                  |                             |
+----------------------------------------+-----------------------------+
| Stretch and Compress Stretch if \| a   | y=a log b ( x )             |
| \|\>1 Compression if \| a \|\<1        |                             |
+----------------------------------------+-----------------------------+
| Reflect about the *x*-axis             | y=− log b ( x )             |
+----------------------------------------+-----------------------------+
| Reflect about the *y*-axis             | y= log b ( −x )             |
+----------------------------------------+-----------------------------+
| General equation for all translations  | y=a log b (x+c)+d           |
+----------------------------------------+-----------------------------+

:::: {#fs-id1165137414493 .note}
::: title
Transformations of Logarithmic Functions
:::

All transformations of the parent logarithmic function, y= log b ( x ),
have the form

$$~f(x) = a\log_{b}\left( {x + c} \right) + d$$

where the parent function, y= log b ( x ),b\>1, is

shifted vertically up

d

units.

shifted horizontally to the left

c

units.

stretched vertically by a factor of

\|

a

\|

if

\|

a

\|

\>

0\.

compressed vertically by a factor of

\|

a

\|

if

0

\<

\|

a

\|

\<

1\.

reflected about the

x-

axis when

a

\<

0\.

For f( x )=log( −x ), the graph of the parent function is reflected
about the *y*-axis.
::::

::: {#Example_04_04_10 .example}
What is the vertical asymptote of f(x)=−2 log 3 (x+4)+5?

The vertical asymptote is at x=−4.

The coefficient, the base, and the upward translation do not affect the
asymptote. The shift of the curve 4 units to the left shifts the
vertical asymptote to x=−4.
:::

:::: {#fs-id1165137748682 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

What is the vertical asymptote of f(x)=3+ln(x−1)?

x=1
::::

::: {#Example_04_04_11 .example}
Find a possible equation for the common logarithmic function graphed in
[\#](#).

<figure id="CNX_Precalc_Figure_04_04_021">

</figure>

This graph has a vertical asymptote at x=--2 and has been vertically
reflected. We do not know yet the vertical shift or the vertical
stretch. We know so far that the equation will have form:

$$f(x) = - a\log(x + 2) + k$$

It appears the graph passes through the points ( --1,1 ) and ( 2,--1 ).
Substituting ( --1,1 ),

$$\begin{array}{ll}
{1 = - a\log(-1 + 2) + k\mspace{9mu}\mspace{9mu}\mspace{9mu}\mspace{9mu}\mspace{9mu}\mspace{9mu}\mspace{9mu}\mspace{9mu}\mspace{9mu}\mspace{9mu}\mspace{9mu}\mspace{9mu}} & {\text{Substitute~}(-1,1).} \\
{1 = - a\log(1) + k} & {\text{Arithmetic}.} \\
{1 = k} & {\text{log(1)} = 0.}
\end{array}$$

Next, substituting in ( 2,--1 ) ,

$$\begin{array}{lll}
{- 1 = - a\log(2 + 2) + 1} & & {\text{Plug~in~}(2,-1).} \\
{- 2 = - a\log(4)} & & {\text{Arithmetic}.} \\
{\mspace{9mu}\ a = \frac{2}{\log(4)}} & & {\text{Solve~for~}a.}
\end{array}$$

This gives us the equation f(x)=-- 2 log(4) log(x+2)+1.

We can verify this answer by comparing the function values in [\#](#)
with the points on the graph in [\#](#).

  ---------- --------- --------- ----------
     *x*        −1         0         1
    *f(x)*       1         0      −0.58496
     *x*         4         5         6
    *f(x)*    −1.5850   −1.8074      −2
  ---------- --------- --------- ----------
:::

:::: {#eip-id1525883 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Give the equation of the natural logarithm graphed in [\#](#).

<figure id="CNX_Precalc_Figure_04_04_022">

</figure>

f(x)=2ln(x+3)−1
::::

:::: {#fs-id1165137855236 .note}
::: title
:::

Q&A

*Is it possible to tell the domain and range and describe the end
behavior of a function just by looking at the graph?*

*Yes, if we know the function is a general logarithmic function. For
example, look at the graph in [\#](#). The graph approaches x=−3 (or
thereabouts) more and more closely, so x=−3 is, or is very close to, the
vertical asymptote. It approaches from the right, so the domain is all
points to the right, {x\|x\>−3}. The range, as with all general
logarithmic functions, is all real numbers. And we can see the end
behavior because the graph goes down as it goes left and up as it goes
right. The end behavior is that as x→− 3 + ,f(x)→−∞ and as x→∞,f(x)→∞.*
::::

:::: {#fs-id1165137735050 .note}
::: title
:::

Media

Access these online resources for additional instruction and practice
with graphing logarithms.

Graph an Exponential Function and Logarithmic Function

Match Graphs with Exponential and Logarithmic Functions

Find the Domain of Logarithmic Functions
::::

# Key Equations {#fs-id1165137749167}

  --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- -------------------------
  General Form for the Translation of the Parent Logarithmic Function f(x)= log b ( x )    f(x)=a log b ( x+c )+d
  --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- -------------------------

# Key Concepts {#fs-id1165137863125}

To find the domain of a logarithmic function, set up an inequality
showing the argument greater than zero, and solve for

x

.

See

and

The graph of the parent function

f

(

x

)

=

log

b

(

x

)

has an

x-

intercept at

(

1

,

0

)

,

domain

(

0

,

∞

)

,

range

(

−

∞

,

∞

)

,

vertical asymptote

x

=

0

,

and

if

b

\>

1

,

the function is increasing.

if

0

\<

b

\<

1

,

the function is decreasing.

See

.

The equation

f

(

x

)

=

log

b

(

x

\+

c

)

shifts the parent function

y

=

log

b

(

x

)

horizontally

left

c

units if

c

\>

0\.

right

c

units if

c

\<

0\.

See

.

The equation

f

(

x

)

=

log

b

(

x

)

\+

d

shifts the parent function

y

=

log

b

(

x

)

vertically

up

d

units if

d

\>

0\.

down

d

units if

d

\<

0\.

See

.

For any constant

a

\>

0

,

the equation

f

(

x

)

=

a

log

b

(

x

)

stretches the parent function

y

=

log

b

(

x

)

vertically by a factor of

a

if

\|

a

\|

\>

1\.

compresses the parent function

y

=

log

b

(

x

)

vertically by a factor of

a

if

\|

a

\|

\<

1\.

See

and

.

When the parent function

y

=

log

b

(

x

)

is multiplied by

−

1

,

the result is a reflection about the

x

-axis. When the input is multiplied by

−

1

,

the result is a reflection about the

y

-axis.

The equation

f

(

x

)

=

−

log

b

(

x

)

represents a reflection of the parent function about the

x-

axis.

The equation

f

(

x

)

=

log

b

(

−

x

)

represents a reflection of the parent function about the

y-

axis.

See

.

A graphing calculator may be used to approximate solutions to some
logarithmic equations See

.

All translations of the logarithmic function can be summarized by the
general equation

f

(

x

)

=

a

log

b

(

x

\+

c

)

\+

d

.

See

.

Given an equation with the general form

f

(

x

)

=

a

log

b

(

x

\+

c

)

\+

d

,

we can identify the vertical asymptote

x

=

−

c

for the transformation. See

.

Using the general equation

f

(

x

)

=

a

log

b

(

x

\+

c

)

\+

d

,

we can write the equation of a logarithmic function given its graph. See

.

# Section Exercises {#fs-id1165135189917}

## Verbal {#fs-id1165135189921}

The inverse of every logarithmic function is an exponential function and
vice-versa. What does this tell us about the relationship between the
coordinates of the points on the graphs of each?

Since the functions are inverses, their graphs are mirror images about
the line y=x. So for every point (a,b) on the graph of a logarithmic
function, there is a corresponding point (b,a) on the graph of its
inverse exponential function.

What type(s) of translation(s), if any, affect the range of a
logarithmic function?

What type(s) of translation(s), if any, affect the domain of a
logarithmic function?

Shifting the function right or left and reflecting the function about
the y-axis will affect its domain.

Consider the general logarithmic function f(x)= log b ( x ). Why can't x
be zero?

Does the graph of a general logarithmic function have a horizontal
asymptote? Explain.

No. A horizontal asymptote would suggest a limit on the range, and the
range of any logarithmic function in general form is all real numbers.

## Algebraic {#fs-id1165137459922}

For the following exercises, state the domain and range of the function.

f(x)= log 3 ( x+4 )

h(x)=ln( 1 2 −x )

Domain: ( −∞, 1 2 ); Range: ( −∞,∞ )

g(x)= log 5 ( 2x+9 )−2

h(x)=ln( 4x+17 )−5

Domain: ( − 17 4 ,∞ ); Range: ( −∞,∞ )

f(x)= log 2 ( 12−3x )−3

For the following exercises, state the domain and the vertical asymptote
of the function.

f(x)= log b (x−5)

Domain: ( 5,∞ ); Vertical asymptote: x=5

g(x)=ln(3−x)

f(x)=log(3x+1)

Domain: ( − 1 3 ,∞ ); Vertical asymptote: x=− 1 3

f(x)=3log(−x)+2

g(x)=−ln(3x+9)−7

Domain: ( −3,∞ ); Vertical asymptote: x=−3

For the following exercises, state the domain, vertical asymptote, and
end behavior of the function.

f(x)=ln( 2−x )

f(x)=log( x− 3 7 )

Domain: ( 3 7 , ∞ ) ; Vertical asymptote: x= 3 7 ; End behavior: as x→ (
3 7 ) + ,f(x)→−∞ and as x→∞,f(x)→∞

h(x)=−log( 3x−4 )+3

g(x)=ln( 2x+6 )−5

Domain: ( −3,∞ ) ; Vertical asymptote: x=−3 ; End behavior: as x→− 3 + ,
f(x)→−∞ and as x→∞ , f(x)→∞

f(x)= log 3 ( 15−5x )+6

For the following exercises, state the domain, range, and *x*- and
*y*-intercepts, if they exist. If they do not exist, write DNE.

h(x)= log 4 ( x−1 )+1

Domain: ( 1,∞ ); Range: ( −∞,∞ ); Vertical asymptote: x=1;
*x*-intercept: ( 5 4 ,0 ); *y*-intercept: DNE

f(x)=log( 5x+10 )+3

g(x)=ln( −x )−2

Domain: ( −∞,0 ); Range: ( −∞,∞ ); Vertical asymptote: x=0;
*x*-intercept: ( − e 2 ,0 ); *y*-intercept: DNE

f(x)= log 2 ( x+2 )−5

h(x)=3ln( x )−9

Domain: ( 0,∞ ); Range: ( −∞,∞ ); Vertical asymptote: x=0;
*x*-intercept: ( e 3 ,0 ); *y*-intercept: DNE

## Graphical {#fs-id1165137422264}

For the following exercises, match each function in [\#](#) with the
letter corresponding to its graph.

<figure id="CNX_Precalc_Figure_04_04_201">

</figure>

d(x)=log( x )

f(x)=ln(x)

B

g(x)= log 2 ( x )

h(x)= log 5 ( x )

C

j(x)= log 25 ( x )

For the following exercises, match each function in [\#](#) with the
letter corresponding to its graph.

<figure id="CNX_Precalc_Figure_04_04_202">

</figure>

f(x)= log 1 3 ( x )

B

g(x)= log 2 ( x )

h(x)= log 3 4 ( x )

C

For the following exercises, sketch the graphs of each pair of functions
on the same axis.

f(x)=log(x) and g(x)= 10 x

f(x)=log(x) and g(x)= log 1 2 (x)

f(x)= log 4 (x) and g(x)=ln(x)

f(x)= e x and g(x)=ln(x)

For the following exercises, match each function in [\#](#) with the
letter corresponding to its graph.

<figure id="CNX_Precalc_Figure_04_04_207">

</figure>

f(x)= log 4 ( −x+2 )

g(x)=− log 4 ( x+2 )

C

h(x)= log 4 ( x+2 )

For the following exercises, sketch the graph of the indicated function.

f(x)= log 2 (x+2)

f(x)=2log(x)

f(x)=ln(−x)

g(x)=log( 4x+16 )+4

g(x)=log( 6−3x )+1

h(x)=− 1 2 ln( x+1 )−3

For the following exercises, write a logarithmic equation corresponding
to the graph shown.

Use y= log 2 (x) as the parent function.

f(x)= log 2 (−(x−1))

Use f(x)= log 3 (x) as the parent function.

Use f(x)= log 4 (x) as the parent function.

f(x)=3 log 4 (x+2)

Use f(x)= log 5 (x) as the parent function.

## Technology {#fs-id1165137705205}

For the following exercises, use a graphing calculator to find
approximate solutions to each equation.

log( x−1 )+2=ln( x−1 )+2

x=2

log( 2x−3 )+2=−log( 2x−3 )+5

ln( x−2 )=−ln( x+1 )

x≈2.303

2ln( 5x+1 )= 1 2 ln( −5x )+1

1 3 log( 1−x )=log( x+1 )+ 1 3

x≈−0.472

## Extensions {#fs-id1165135485736}

Let b be any positive real number such that b≠1. What must log b 1 be
equal to? Verify the result.

Explore and discuss the graphs of f(x)= log 1 2 ( x ) and g(x)=− log 2 (
x ). Make a conjecture based on the result.

The graphs of f(x)= log 1 2 ( x ) and g(x)=− log 2 ( x ) appear to be
the same; Conjecture: for any positive base b≠1, log b ( x )=− log 1 b (
x ).

Prove the conjecture made in the previous exercise.

What is the domain of the function f(x)=ln( x+2 x−4 )? Discuss the
result.

Recall that the argument of a logarithmic function must be positive, so
we determine where x+2 x−4 \>0 . From the graph of the function f( x )=
x+2 x−4 , note that the graph lies above the *x*-axis on the interval (
−∞,−2 ) and again to the right of the vertical asymptote, that is ( 4,∞
). Therefore, the domain is ( −∞,−2 )∪( 4,∞ ).

Use properties of exponents to find the *x*-intercepts of the function
f(x)=log( x 2 +4x+4 ) algebraically. Show the steps for solving, and
then verify the result by graphing the function.
