m49365

> In this section, you will:
>
> Use the product rule for logarithms.
>
> Use the quotient rule for logarithms.
>
> Use the power rule for logarithms.
>
> Expand logarithmic expressions.
>
> Condense logarithmic expressions.
>
> Use the change-of-base formula for logarithms.

9d565dd7-7228-45d1-b907-b0e9b7418fb9

#  {#corqs}

## Learning Objectives {#eip-180}

Simplify expressions using the properties for exponents. (IA 5.2.1)

Use the properties of logarithms. (IA 10.4.1)

## Objective 1: Simplify expressions using the properties for exponents (IA 5.2.1) {#eip-72}

:::: {#eip-417 .note}
::: title
Vocabulary
:::

Simplify expressions using the properties for exponents.

Fill in the blanks:

In the expression

a

m

,

a

is called \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_, and

m

is called \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_.

For example,

(

--3

)

4

means \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ which simplifies to \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_.
::::

### The Product Property {#eip-idm256006080}

Simplify expressions using the properties for exponents.

  ---------------------- -- ----------
  Simplify                  x2·x3
  What does this mean?      
  Now we see that           x2·x3=x5
  ---------------------- -- ----------

*To multiply powers with the same base we need to \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
exponents.*

This leads us to the Product Property am·an=am+n

### The Quotient Property {#eip-idm175771520}

Simplify x5x2

  ---------------------- --------- -----------------------------
  What does this mean?   xxxxxxx   After simplifying we get x3
  Now we see that        x5x2=x3   
  ---------------------- --------- -----------------------------

*To divide powers with the same base we need to \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
exponents.*

This leads us to the Quotient Property am·an=am-n

### The Power Property {#eip-idm200374592}

Simplify (x2)4

  ---------------------- ------------- ------------------------------------
  What does this mean?   x2·x2·x2·x2   After adding exponents we get x8 .
  Now we see that        (x2)4=x8      
  ---------------------- ------------- ------------------------------------

*To raise a power to a power we need to \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ exponents.*

This leads us to the Power Property (am)n=amn .

We will also use these other properties:

  ------------------------------- ---------------
  *Negative Exponents Property*   x-n=1xn, x≠0 
  *Zero Exponent Property*        a0=1, if a≠0
  ------------------------------- ---------------

::: {#eip-317 .example}
Simplify expressions using the properties for exponents.

ⓐ

Simplify

3

∙

2

x

∙

2

3

x

ⓑ

Simplify

b

2

b

6

b

b

4

b

7

ⓒ

Simplify

(

a

b

2

)

3

a

5

b

\-

6

ⓐ

  --------------------------- ---------
  Use the product property.   3∙2x+3x
  Simplify.                   3∙24x
  --------------------------- ---------

ⓑ

  -------------------------------------------------- ---------
  Use the product property and multiply exponents.   b9b11
  Use the quotient property and add exponents.       b-2=1b2
  -------------------------------------------------- ---------

ⓒ

  ------------------------------------------------ -----------
  Use the power property and multiply exponents.   a3b6a5b-6
  Use the product property and add exponents.      a8b0
  Any base to the power of zero equals 1.          a8(1)=a8
  ------------------------------------------------ -----------
:::

### Practice Makes Perfect {#eip-722}

Simplify expressions using the properties for exponents.

3b5∙2b12

x∙x5∙x7

b15c4b4c

4x0

12x-6

(2a3)3(a4)2

a-3b52a-6

## Objective 2: Use the properties of logarithms (IA 10.4.1). {#eip-728}

  Property                            Base a                  Base e
  ----------------------------------- ----------------------- -----------------
                                      loga1=0                 ln1=0
                                      logaa=1                 lne=1
  *Inverse Properties*                alogax=xlogaax=x        elnx=x lnex=x
  *Product Property of Logarithms*    loga(M·N)=logaM+logaN   ln(M·N)=lnM+lnN
  *Quotient Property of Logarithms*   logaMN=logaM−logaN      lnMN=lnM−lnN
  *Power Property of Logarithms*      logaMp=plogaM           lnMp=plnM

::: {#eip-122 .example}
Use the Properties of Logarithms to expand the logarithm log4(2x3y2) .
Simplify, if possible.

  ---------------------------------------------------------------- ------------------------------
                                                                   log4(2x3y2)
  Use the Product Property, logaM·N=logaM+logaN .                  log42+log4x3+log4y2
  Use the Power Property, logaMp=plogaM , on the last two terms.   log42+3log4x+2log4y
  Simplify.                                                        12+3log4x+2log4y
                                                                   log4(2x3y2)=12+3log4x+2log4y
  ---------------------------------------------------------------- ------------------------------
:::

::: {#eip-422 .example}
Use the Properties of Logarithms to expand the logarithm log2x33y2z4 .
Simplify, if possible.

  --------------------------------------------------------------------- -------------------------------------------
                                                                        log2x33y2z4
  Rewrite the radical with a rational exponent.                         log2(x33y2z)14
  Use the Power Property, logaMp=plogaM .                               14log2(x33y2z)
  Use the Quotient Property, logaM·N=logaM−logaN .                      14(log2(x3)−log2(3y2z))
  Use the Product Property, logaM·N=logaM+logaN , in the second term.   14(log2(x3)−(log23+log2y2+log2z))
  Use the Power Property, logaMp=plogaM , inside the parentheses.       14(3log2x−(log23+2log2y+log2z))
  Simplify by distributing.                                             14(3log2x−log23−2log2y−log2z)
                                                                        log2x33y2z4=14(3log2x−log23−2log2y−log2z)
  --------------------------------------------------------------------- -------------------------------------------
:::

::: {#eip-938 .example}
Use the Properties of Logarithms to condense the logarithm
log43+log4x−log4y . Simplify, if possible.

  -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ---------------------------
  The log expressions all have the same base, 4.                                         log43+log4x−log4y
  The first two terms are added, so we use the Product Property, logaM+logaN=logaM·N .   log43x−log4y
  Since the logs are subtracted, we use the Quotient Property, logaM−logaN=logaMN .      log43xy
                                                                                         log43+log4x−log4y=log43xy
  -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ---------------------------
:::

### Practice Makes Perfect {#eip-35}

Use the properties of logarithms to expand: log3(9x5y4)

Use the properties of logarithms to expand: log5x525y3z3

Use the Properties of Logarithms to condense the logarithm:
logb5+logbc-logbb

Use the Properties of Logarithms to condense the logarithm:
2log3x+3log3(x+1)

<figure id="CNX_Precalc_Figure_04_05_001">

</figure>

In chemistry, pH is used as a measure of the acidity or alkalinity of a
substance. The pH scale runs from 0 to 14. Substances with a pH less
than 7 are considered acidic, and substances with a pH greater than 7
are said to be basic. Our bodies, for instance, must maintain a pH close
to 7.35 in order for enzymes to work properly. To get a feel for what is
acidic and what is basic, consider the following pH levels of some
common substances:

Battery acid: 0.8

Stomach acid: 2.7

Orange juice: 3.3

Pure water: 7 (at 25° C)

Human blood: 7.35

Fresh coconut: 7.8

Sodium hydroxide (lye): 14

To determine whether a solution is acidic or basic, we find its pH,
which is a measure of the number of active positive hydrogen ions in the
solution. The pH is defined by the following formula, where H+ is the
concentration of hydrogen ion in the solution

$$\begin{array}{l}
{\text{pH} = - \log(\lbrack H^{+}\rbrack)} \\
{= \log\left( \frac{1}{\lbrack H^{+}\rbrack} \right)}
\end{array}$$

The equivalence of −log( \[ H + \] ) and log( 1 \[ H + \] ) is one of
the logarithm properties we will examine in this section.

# Using the Product Rule for Logarithms {#fs-id1165137737533}

Recall that the logarithmic and exponential functions "undo" each other.
This means that logarithms have similar properties to exponents. Some
important properties of logarithms are given here. First, the following
properties are easy to prove.

$$\begin{array}{l}
{\log_{b}1 = 0} \\
{\log_{b}b = 1}
\end{array}$$

For example, log 5 1=0 since 5 0 =1. And log 5 5=1 since 5 1 =5.

Next, we have the inverse property.

$$\begin{array}{l}
 \\
{\log_{b}(b^{x}) = x} \\
{\mspace{9mu}\text{~~}b^{\log_{b}x} = x,x > 0}
\end{array}$$

For example, to evaluate log( 100 ), we can rewrite the logarithm as log
10 ( 10 2 ), and then apply the inverse property log b ( b x )=x to get
log 10 ( 10 2 )=2.

To evaluate e ln( 7 ) , we can rewrite the logarithm as e log e 7 , and
then apply the inverse property b log b x =x to get e log e 7 =7.

Finally, we have the one-to-one property.

$$\log_{b}M = \log_{b}N\mspace{9mu}\mspace{9mu}\text{if~and~only~if}\mspace{9mu}\mspace{9mu} M = N$$

We can use the one-to-one property to solve the equation log 3 ( 3x )=
log 3 ( 2x+5 ) for x. Since the bases are the same, we can apply the
one-to-one property by setting the arguments equal and solving for x:

$$\begin{array}{ll}
{3x = 2x + 5\mspace{9mu}\mspace{9mu}\mspace{9mu}\mspace{9mu}\mspace{9mu}} & {\text{Set~the~arguments~equal}\text{.}} \\
{\mspace{9mu}\mspace{9mu}\mspace{9mu}\mspace{9mu} x = 5} & {\text{Subtract~2}x\text{.}}
\end{array}$$

But what about the equation log 3 ( 3x )+ log 3 ( 2x+5 )=2? The
one-to-one property does not help us in this instance. Before we can
solve an equation like this, we need a method for combining terms on the
left side of the equation.

Recall that we use the *product rule of exponents* to combine the
product of powers by adding exponents: x a x b = x a+b . We have a
similar property for logarithms, called the *product rule for
logarithms*, which says that the logarithm of a product is equal to a
sum of logarithms. Because logs are exponents, and we multiply like
bases, we can add the exponents. We will use the inverse property to
derive the product rule below.

Given any real number x and positive real numbers M,N, and b, where b≠1,
we will show

$$\log_{b}\left( {MN} \right)\text{=}\log_{b}(M) + \log_{b}(N).$$

Let m= log b M and n= log b N. In exponential form, these equations are
b m =M and b n =N. It follows that

$$\begin{array}{lll}
{\log_{b}\left( {MN} \right)} & {= \log_{b}\left( {b^{m}b^{n}} \right)\mspace{9mu}\mspace{9mu}\mspace{9mu}\mspace{9mu}\mspace{9mu}\mspace{9mu}} & {\text{Substitute~for~}M\mspace{9mu}\text{and~}N.} \\
 & {= \log_{b}\left( b^{m + n} \right)} & {\text{Apply~the~product~rule~for~exponents}.} \\
 & {= m + n} & {\text{Apply~the~inverse~property~of~logs}.} \\
 & {= \log_{b}(M) + \log_{b}(N)} & {\text{Substitute~for~}m\mspace{9mu}\text{and~}n.}
\end{array}$$

Note that repeated applications of the product rule for logarithms allow
us to simplify the logarithm of the product of any number of factors.
For example, consider log b (wxyz). Using the product rule for
logarithms, we can rewrite this logarithm of a product as the sum of
logarithms of its factors:

$$\log_{b}(wxyz) = \log_{b}w + \log_{b}x + \log_{b}y + \log_{b}z$$

:::: {#fs-id1165137891324 .note}
::: title
The Product Rule for Logarithms
:::

The product rule for logarithms can be used to simplify a logarithm of a
product by rewriting it as a sum of individual logarithms.

$$\log_{b}(MN) = \log_{b}(M) + \log_{b}(N)\mspace{9mu}\text{for~}b > 0$$
::::

:::: {#fs-id1165137541378 .note}
::: title
:::

How To

*Given the logarithm of a product, use the product rule of logarithms to
write an equivalent sum of logarithms.*

Factor the argument completely, expressing each whole number factor as a
product of primes.

Write the equivalent expression by summing the logarithms of each
factor.
::::

::: {#Example_04_05_01 .example}
Expand log 3 ( 30x( 3x+4 ) ).

We begin by factoring the argument completely, expressing 30 as a
product of primes.

$$\log_{3}\left( {30x\left( {3x + 4} \right)} \right) = \log_{3}\left( {2 \cdot 3 \cdot 5 \cdot x \cdot \left( {3x + 4} \right)} \right)$$

Next we write the equivalent equation by summing the logarithms of each
factor.

$$\log_{3}\left( {30x\left( {3x + 4} \right)} \right) = \log_{3}(2) + \log_{3}(3) + \log_{3}(5) + \log_{3}(x) + \log_{3}\left( {3x + 4} \right)$$
:::

:::: {#fs-id1165135525909 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Expand log b (8k).

log b 2+ log b 2+ log b 2+ log b k=3 log b 2+ log b k
::::

# Using the Quotient Rule for Logarithms {#fs-id1165135151295}

For quotients, we have a similar rule for logarithms. Recall that we use
the *quotient rule of exponents* to combine the quotient of exponents by
subtracting: x a x b = x a−b . The *quotient rule for logarithms* says
that the logarithm of a quotient is equal to a difference of logarithms.
Just as with the product rule, we can use the inverse property to derive
the quotient rule.

Given any real number x and positive real numbers M, N, and b, where
b≠1, we will show

$$\log_{b}\left( \frac{M}{N} \right)\text{=}\log_{b}(M) - \log_{b}(N).$$

Let m= log b M and n= log b N. In exponential form, these equations are
b m =M and b n =N. It follows that

$$\begin{array}{lll}
{\log_{b}\left( \frac{M}{N} \right)} & {= \log_{b}\left( \frac{b^{m}}{b^{n}} \right)\mspace{9mu}\mspace{9mu}\mspace{9mu}\mspace{9mu}\mspace{9mu}} & {\text{Substitute~for~}M\mspace{9mu}\text{and~}N.} \\
 & {= \log_{b}\left( b^{m - n} \right)} & {\text{Apply~the~quotient~rule~for~exponents}.} \\
 & {= m - n} & {\text{Apply~the~inverse~property~of~logs}.} \\
 & {= \log_{b}(M) - \log_{b}(N)} & {\text{Substitute~for~}m\mspace{9mu}\text{and~}n.}
\end{array}$$

For example, to expand log( 2 x 2 +6x 3x+9 ), we must first express the
quotient in lowest terms. Factoring and canceling we get,

$$\begin{array}{ll}
{\log\left( \frac{2x^{2} + 6x}{3x + 9} \right) = \log\left( \frac{2x(x + 3)}{3(x + 3)} \right)} & {\text{Factor~the~numerator~and~denominator}.} \\
{\mspace{9mu}\text{~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~} = \log\left( \frac{2x}{3} \right)} & {\text{Cancel~the~common~factors}.}
\end{array}$$

Next we apply the quotient rule by subtracting the logarithm of the
denominator from the logarithm of the numerator. Then we apply the
product rule.

$$\begin{array}{l}
{\log\left( \frac{2x}{3} \right) = \log(2x) - \log(3)} \\
{\mspace{9mu}\text{~~~~~~~~~~~~} = \log(2) + \log(x) - \log(3)}
\end{array}$$

:::: {#fs-id1165137733855 .note}
::: title
The Quotient Rule for Logarithms
:::

The quotient rule for logarithms can be used to simplify a logarithm or
a quotient by rewriting it as the difference of individual logarithms.
$$\log_{b}\left( \frac{M}{N} \right) = \log_{b}M - \log_{b}N$$
::::

:::: {#fs-id1165137749807 .note}
::: title
:::

How To

*Given the logarithm of a quotient, use the quotient rule of logarithms
to write an equivalent difference of logarithms.*

Express the argument in lowest terms by factoring the numerator and
denominator and canceling common terms.

Write the equivalent expression by subtracting the logarithm of the
denominator from the logarithm of the numerator.

Check to see that each term is fully expanded. If not, apply the product
rule for logarithms to expand completely.
::::

::: {#Example_04_05_02 .example}
Expand log 2 ( 15x(x−1) (3x+4)(2−x) ).

First we note that the quotient is factored and in lowest terms, so we
apply the quotient rule.

$$\log_{2}\left( \frac{15x(x - 1)}{(3x + 4)(2 - x)} \right) = \log_{2}\left( {15x(x - 1)} \right) - \log_{2}\left( {(3x + 4)(2 - x)} \right)$$

Notice that the resulting terms are logarithms of products. To expand
completely, we apply the product rule, noting that the prime factors of
the factor 15 are 3 and 5.

$$\begin{array}{l}
{\log_{2}(15x(x - 1)) - \log_{2}((3x + 4)(2 - x)) = \lbrack\log_{2}(3) + \log_{2}(5) + \log_{2}(x) + \log_{2}(x - 1)\rbrack - \lbrack\log_{2}(3x + 4) + \log_{2}(2 - x)\rbrack} \\
{\mspace{9mu}\text{~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~} = \log_{2}(3) + \log_{2}(5) + \log_{2}(x) + \log_{2}(x - 1) - \log_{2}(3x + 4) - \log_{2}(2 - x)}
\end{array}$$

There are exceptions to consider in this and later examples. First,
because denominators must never be zero, this expression is not defined
for x=− 4 3 and x=2. Also, since the argument of a logarithm must be
positive, we note as we observe the expanded logarithm, that x\>0, x\>1,
x\>− 4 3 , and x\<2. Combining these conditions is beyond the scope of
this section, and we will not consider them here or in subsequent
exercises.
:::

:::: {#fs-id1165137534455 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Expand log 3 ( 7 x 2 +21x 7x( x−1 )( x−2 ) ).

log 3 ( x+3 )− log 3 ( x−1 )− log 3 ( x−2 )
::::

# Using the Power Rule for Logarithms {#fs-id1165137627625}

We've explored the product rule and the quotient rule, but how can we
take the logarithm of a power, such as x 2 ? One method is as follows:

$$\begin{array}{ll}
{\log_{b}\left( x^{2} \right)} & {= \log_{b}\left( {x \cdot x} \right)} \\
 & {= \log_{b}x + \log_{b}x} \\
 & {= 2\log_{b}x}
\end{array}$$

Notice that we used the product rule for logarithms to find a solution
for the example above. By doing so, we have derived the *power rule for
logarithms*, which says that the log of a power is equal to the exponent
times the log of the base. Keep in mind that, although the input to a
logarithm may not be written as a power, we may be able to change it to
a power. For example,

$$\begin{array}{lll}
{100 = 10^{2}\mspace{9mu}\mspace{9mu}\mspace{9mu}\mspace{9mu}\mspace{9mu}} & {\sqrt{3} = 3^{\frac{1}{2}}\mspace{9mu}\mspace{9mu}\mspace{9mu}\mspace{9mu}\mspace{9mu}} & {\frac{1}{e} = e^{- 1}}
\end{array}$$

:::: {#fs-id1165137676322 .note}
::: title
The Power Rule for Logarithms
:::

The power rule for logarithms can be used to simplify the logarithm of a
power by rewriting it as the product of the exponent times the logarithm
of the base.

$$\log_{b}\left( M^{n} \right) = n\log_{b}M$$
::::

:::: {#fs-id1165137639704 .note}
::: title
:::

How To

*Given the logarithm of a power, use the power rule of logarithms to
write an equivalent product of a factor and a logarithm.*

Express the argument as a power, if needed.

Write the equivalent expression by multiplying the exponent times the
logarithm of the base.
::::

::: {#Example_04_05_03 .example}
Expand log 2 x 5 .

The argument is already written as a power, so we identify the exponent,
5, and the base, x, and rewrite the equivalent expression by multiplying
the exponent times the logarithm of the base.

$$\log_{2}\left( x^{5} \right) = 5\log_{2}x$$
:::

:::: {#fs-id1165135508373 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Expand ln x 2 .

2lnx
::::

::: {#Example_04_05_04 .example}
Expand log 3 ( 25 ) using the power rule for logs.

Expressing the argument as a power, we get log 3 ( 25 )= log 3 ( 5 2 ).

Next we identify the exponent, 2, and the base, 5, and rewrite the
equivalent expression by multiplying the exponent times the logarithm of
the base.

$$\log_{3}\left( 5^{2} \right) = 2\log_{3}(5)$$
:::

:::: {#fs-id1165137643493 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Expand ln( 1 x 2 ).

−2ln(x)
::::

::: {#Example_04_05_05 .example}
Rewrite 4ln(x) using the power rule for logs to a single logarithm with
a leading coefficient of 1.

Because the logarithm of a power is the product of the exponent times
the logarithm of the base, it follows that the product of a number and a
logarithm can be written as a power. For the expression 4ln(x), we
identify the factor, 4, as the exponent and the argument, x, as the
base, and rewrite the product as a logarithm of a power: 4ln(x)=ln( x 4
).
:::

:::: {#fs-id1165137724030 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Rewrite 2 log 3 4 using the power rule for logs to a single logarithm
with a leading coefficient of 1.

log 3 16
::::

# Expanding Logarithmic Expressions {#fs-id1165137657409}

Taken together, the product rule, quotient rule, and power rule are
often called "laws of logs." Sometimes we apply more than one rule in
order to simplify an expression. For example:

$$\begin{array}{ll}
{\log_{b}\left( \frac{6x}{y} \right)} & {= \log_{b}\left( {6x} \right) - \log_{b}y} \\
 & {= \log_{b}6 + \log_{b}x - \log_{b}y}
\end{array}$$

We can use the power rule to expand logarithmic expressions involving
negative and fractional exponents. Here is an alternate proof of the
quotient rule for logarithms using the fact that a reciprocal is a
negative power:

$$\begin{array}{ll}
{\log_{b}\left( \frac{A}{C} \right)} & {= \log_{b}\left( {AC^{- 1}} \right)} \\
 & {= \log_{b}(A) + \log_{b}\left( C^{- 1} \right)} \\
 & {= \log_{b}A + ( - 1)\log_{b}C} \\
 & {= \log_{b}A - \log_{b}C}
\end{array}$$

We can also apply the product rule to express a sum or difference of
logarithms as the logarithm of a product.

With practice, we can look at a logarithmic expression and expand it
mentally, writing the final answer. Remember, however, that we can only
do this with products, quotients, powers, and roots---never with
addition or subtraction inside the argument of the logarithm.

::: {#Example_04_05_06 .example}
Rewrite ln( x 4 y 7 ) as a sum or difference of logs.

First, because we have a quotient of two expressions, we can use the
quotient rule:

$$\ln\left( \frac{x^{4}y}{7} \right) = \ln\left( {x^{4}y} \right) - \ln(7)$$

Then seeing the product in the first term, we use the product rule:

$$\ln\left( {x^{4}y} \right) - \ln(7) = \ln\left( x^{4} \right) + \ln(y) - \ln(7)$$

Finally, we use the power rule on the first term:

$$\ln\left( x^{4} \right) + \ln(y) - \ln(7) = 4\ln(x) + \ln(y) - \ln(7)$$
:::

:::: {#fs-id1165135182933 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Expand log( x 2 y 3 z 4 ).

2logx+3logy−4logz
::::

::: {#Example_04_05_07 .example}
Expand log( x ).

$$\begin{array}{ll}
{\log\left( \sqrt{x} \right)} & {= \log x^{(\frac{1}{2})}} \\
 & {= \frac{1}{2}\log x}
\end{array}$$
:::

:::: {#fs-id1165137804487 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Expand ln( x 2 3 ).

2 3 lnx
::::

:::: {#fs-id1165135173426 .note}
::: title
:::

Q&A

*Can we expand* ln( x 2 + y 2 )?

*No. There is no way to expand the logarithm of a sum or difference
inside the argument of the logarithm.*
::::

::: {#Example_04_05_08 .example}
Expand log 6 ( 64 x 3 ( 4x+1 ) ( 2x−1 ) ).

We can expand by applying the Product and Quotient Rules.

$$\begin{array}{lll}
{\log_{6}\left( \frac{64x^{3}(4x + 1)}{(2x - 1)} \right)} & {= \log_{6}64 + \log_{6}x^{3} + \log_{6}(4x + 1) - \log_{6}(2x - 1)} & {\text{Apply~the~Quotient~Rule}.} \\
 & {= \log_{6}2^{6} + \log_{6}x^{3} + \log_{6}(4x + 1) - \log_{6}(2x - 1)} & {\text{Simplify~by~writing~~64~as~2}^{6}.} \\
 & {= 6\log_{6}2 + 3\log_{6}x + \log_{6}(4x + 1) - \log_{6}(2x - 1)} & {\text{Apply~the~Power~Rule}.}
\end{array}$$
:::

:::: {#fs-id1165135635237 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Expand ln( (x−1) (2x+1) 2 ( x 2 −9) ).

1 2 ln( x−1 )+ln( 2x+1 )−ln( x+3 )−ln( x−3 )
::::

# Condensing Logarithmic Expressions {#fs-id1165135190855}

We can use the rules of logarithms we just learned to condense sums,
differences, and products with the same base as a single logarithm. It
is important to remember that the logarithms must have the same base to
be combined. We will learn later how to change the base of any logarithm
before condensing.

:::: {#fs-id1165135190866 .note}
::: title
:::

How To

*Given a sum, difference, or product of logarithms with the same base,
write an equivalent expression as a single logarithm.*

Apply the power property first. Identify terms that are products of
factors and a logarithm, and rewrite each as the logarithm of a power.

Next apply the product property. Rewrite sums of logarithms as the
logarithm of a product.

Apply the quotient property last. Rewrite differences of logarithms as
the logarithm of a quotient.
::::

::: {#Example_04_05_09 .example}
Write log 3 ( 5 )+ log 3 ( 8 )− log 3 ( 2 ) as a single logarithm.

Using the product and quotient rules

$$\log_{3}(5) + \log_{3}(8) = \log_{3}\left( {5 \cdot 8} \right) = \log_{3}(40)$$

This reduces our original expression to

$$\log_{3}(40) - \log_{3}(2)$$

Then, using the quotient rule

$$\log_{3}(40) - \log_{3}(2) = \log_{3}\left( \frac{40}{2} \right) = \log_{3}(20)$$
:::

:::: {#fs-id1165134047701 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Condense log3−log4+log5−log6.

log( 3⋅5 4⋅6 ); can also be written log( 5 8 ) by reducing the fraction
to lowest terms.
::::

::: {#Example_04_05_10 .example}
Condense log 2 ( x 2 )+ 1 2 log 2 ( x−1 )−3 log 2 ( ( x+3 ) 2 ).

We apply the power rule first:

$$\log_{2}\left( x^{2} \right) + \frac{1}{2}\log_{2}\left( {x - 1} \right) - 3\log_{2}\left( \left( {x + 3} \right)^{2} \right) = \log_{2}\left( x^{2} \right) + \log_{2}\left( \sqrt{x - 1} \right) - \log_{2}\left( \left( {x + 3} \right)^{6} \right)$$

Next we apply the product rule to the sum:

$$\log_{2}\left( x^{2} \right) + \log_{2}\left( \sqrt{x - 1} \right) - \log_{2}\left( \left( {x + 3} \right)^{6} \right) = \log_{2}\left( {x^{2}\sqrt{x - 1}} \right) - \log_{2}\left( \left( {x + 3} \right)^{6} \right)$$

Finally, we apply the quotient rule to the difference:

$$\log_{2}\left( {x^{2}\sqrt{x - 1}} \right) - \log_{2}\left( \left( {x + 3} \right)^{6} \right) = \log_{2}\frac{x^{2}\sqrt{x - 1}}{\left( {x + 3} \right)^{6}}$$
:::

:::: {#eip-idm806696448 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Rewrite log( 5 )+0.5log( x )−log( 7x−1 )+3log( x−1 ) as a single
logarithm.

log( 5 ( x−1 ) 3 x ( 7x−1 ) )
::::

::: {#Example_04_05_11 .example}
Rewrite 2logx−4log(x+5)+ 1 x log( 3x+5 ) as a single logarithm.

We apply the power rule first:

$${2\log x–4\log(x + 5)} + {\frac{1}{x}{\log(3x + 5)}} = \log\left( x^{2} \right) - \log\left( {x + 5} \right)^{4} + \log\left( {(3x + 5)}^{x^{- 1}} \right)$$

Next we rearrange and apply the product rule to the sum:

$$\log\left( x^{2} \right) - \log(x + 5)^{4} + \log\left( {(3x + 5)}^{x^{- 1}} \right)$$

$$= \log\left( x^{2} \right) + \log\left( {(3x + 5)}^{x^{- 1}} \right) - \log(x + 5)^{4}$$

$$= \log\left( x^{2}{(3x + 5)}^{x^{- 1}} \right) - \log(x + 5)^{4}$$

Finally, we apply the quotient rule to the difference:

$$= \log{\left( x^{2}(3x + 5)^{x^{-1}} \right) -}{\log(x + 5)}^{4} = \log\frac{x^{2}(3x + 5)^{x^{-1}}}{(x + 5)^{4}}$$
:::

:::: {#eip-id2047062 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Condense 4( 3log( x )+log( x+5 )−log( 2x+3 ) ).

log x 12 ( x+5 ) 4 ( 2x+3 ) 4 ; this answer could also be written log (
x 3 ( x+5 ) ( 2x+3 ) ) 4 .
::::

::: {#Example_04_05_12 .example}
Recall that, in chemistry, pH=−log\[ H + \]. If the concentration of
hydrogen ions in a liquid is doubled, what is the effect on pH?

Suppose C is the original concentration of hydrogen ions, and P is the
original pH of the liquid. Then P=--log(C). If the concentration is
doubled, the new concentration is 2C. Then the pH of the new liquid is

$$\text{pH} = - \log\left( {2C} \right)$$

Using the product rule of logs

$$\text{pH} = - \log\left( {2C} \right) = - \left( {\log(2) + \log(C)} \right) = - \log(2) - \log(C)$$

Since P=--log(C), the new pH is

$$\text{pH} = P - \log(2) \approx P - 0.301$$

When the concentration of hydrogen ions is doubled, the pH decreases by
about 0.301.
:::

:::: {#fs-id1165135251368 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

How does the pH change when the concentration of positive hydrogen ions
is decreased by half?

The pH increases by about 0.301.
::::

# Using the Change-of-Base Formula for Logarithms {#fs-id1165137675210}

Most calculators can evaluate only common and natural logs. In order to
evaluate logarithms with a base other than 10 or e, we use the
change-of-base formula to rewrite the logarithm as the quotient of
logarithms of any other base; when using a calculator, we would change
them to common or natural logs.

To derive the change-of-base formula, we use the one-to-one property and
power rule for logarithms.

Given any positive real numbers M,b, and n, where n≠1  and b≠1, we show

$$\log_{b}M\text{=}\frac{\log_{n}M}{\log_{n}b}$$

Let y= log b M. By exponentiating both sides with base b , we arrive at
an exponential form, namely b y =M. It follows that

$$\begin{array}{lll}
{\log_{n}(b^{y})} & {= \log_{n}M} & {\text{Apply~the~one-to-one~property}.} \\
{y\log_{n}b} & {= \log_{n}M~} & \text{Apply~the~power~rule~for~logarithms.} \\
y & {= \frac{\log_{n}M}{\log_{n}b}} & {\text{Isolate~}y.} \\
{\log_{b}M} & {= \frac{\log_{n}M}{\log_{n}b}} & {\text{Substitute~for~}y.}
\end{array}$$

For example, to evaluate log 5 36 using a calculator, we must first
rewrite the expression as a quotient of common or natural logs. We will
use the common log.

$$\begin{array}{lll}
{\log_{5}36} & {= \frac{\log(36)}{\log(5)}\mspace{9mu}\mspace{9mu}} & {\text{Apply~the~change~of~base~formula~using~base~10}\text{.}} \\
 & {\approx 2.2266\mspace{9mu}} & {\text{Use~a~calculator~to~evaluate~to~4~decimal~places}\text{.}}
\end{array}$$

:::: {#fs-id1165134381722 .note}
::: title
The Change-of-Base Formula
:::

The change-of-base formula can be used to evaluate a logarithm with any
base.

For any positive real numbers M,b, and n, where n≠1  and b≠1,

$$\log_{b}M\text{=}\frac{\log_{n}M}{\log_{n}b}.$$

It follows that the change-of-base formula can be used to rewrite a
logarithm with any base as the quotient of common or natural logs.

$$\log_{b}M = \frac{\ln M}{\ln b}$$

and

$$\log_{b}M = \frac{\log M}{\log b}$$
::::

:::: {#fs-id1165137893333 .note}
::: title
:::

How To

*Given a logarithm with the form log b M, use the change-of-base formula
to rewrite it as a quotient of logs with any positive base *n,* where
n≠1.*

Determine the new base

n

,

remembering that the common log,

log

(

x

)

,

has base 10, and the natural log,

ln

(

x

)

,

has base

e

.

Rewrite the log as a quotient using the change-of-base formula

The numerator of the quotient will be a logarithm with base

n

and argument

M

.

The denominator of the quotient will be a logarithm with base

n

and argument

b

.
::::

::: {#Example_04_05_13 .example}
Change log 5 3 to a quotient of natural logarithms.

Because we will be expressing log 5 3 as a quotient of natural
logarithms, the new base, n=e.

We rewrite the log as a quotient using the change-of-base formula. The
numerator of the quotient will be the natural log with argument 3. The
denominator of the quotient will be the natural log with argument 5.

$$\begin{array}{ll}
{\log_{b}M} & {= \frac{\ln M}{\ln b}} \\
{\log_{5}3} & {= \frac{\ln 3}{\ln 5}}
\end{array}$$
:::

:::: {#fs-id1165134223298 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Change log 0.5 8 to a quotient of natural logarithms.

ln8 ln0.5
::::

:::: {#fs-id1165135181811 .note}
::: title
:::

Q&A

*Can we change common logarithms to natural logarithms?*

*Yes. Remember that log9 means log 10 9. So, log9= ln9 ln10 .*
::::

::: {#Example_04_05_14 .example}
Evaluate log 2 (10) using the change-of-base formula with a calculator.

According to the change-of-base formula, we can rewrite the log base 2
as a logarithm of any other base. Since our calculators can evaluate the
natural log, we might choose to use the natural logarithm, which is the
log base e.

$$\begin{array}{ll}
{\log_{2}10 = \frac{\ln 10}{\ln 2}} & {\text{Apply~the~change~of~base~formula~using~base~}e.} \\
{\approx 3.3219} & {\text{Use~a~calculator~to~evaluate~to~4~decimal~places}.}
\end{array}$$
:::

:::: {#fs-id1165135358905 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Evaluate log 5 (100) using the change-of-base formula.

ln100 ln5 ≈ 4.6051 1.6094 =2.861
::::

:::: {#fs-id1165135593398 .note}
::: title
:::

Media

Access these online resources for additional instruction and practice
with laws of logarithms.

The Properties of Logarithms

Expand Logarithmic Expressions

Evaluate a Natural Logarithmic Expression
::::

# Key Equations {#fs-id1165135570408}

  ---------------------------------- -----------------------------------------------
  The Product Rule for Logarithms    log b (MN)= log b ( M )+ log b ( N )
  The Quotient Rule for Logarithms   log b ( M N )= log b M− log b N
  The Power Rule for Logarithms      log b ( M n )=n log b M
  The Change-of-Base Formula         log b M= log n M log n b         n\>0,n≠1,b≠1
  ---------------------------------- -----------------------------------------------

# Key Concepts {#fs-id1165134049414}

We can use the product rule of logarithms to rewrite the log of a
product as a sum of logarithms. See

.

We can use the quotient rule of logarithms to rewrite the log of a
quotient as a difference of logarithms. See

.

We can use the power rule for logarithms to rewrite the log of a power
as the product of the exponent and the log of its base. See

,

, and

.

We can use the product rule, the quotient rule, and the power rule
together to combine or expand a logarithm with a complex input. See

,

,

and

.

The rules of logarithms can also be used to condense sums, differences,
and products with the same base as a single logarithm. See

,

,

, and

.

We can convert a logarithm with any base to a quotient of logarithms
with any other base using the change-of-base formula. See

.

The change-of-base formula is often used to rewrite a logarithm with a
base other than 10 and

e

as the quotient of natural or common logs. That way a calculator can be
used to evaluate. See

.

# Section Exercises {#fs-id1165135176340}

## Verbal {#fs-id1165135176344}

How does the power rule for logarithms help when solving logarithms with
the form log b ( x n )?

Any root expression can be rewritten as an expression with a rational
exponent so that the power rule can be applied, making the logarithm
easier to calculate. Thus, log b ( x 1 n )= 1 n log b (x).

What does the change-of-base formula do? Why is it useful when using a
calculator?

## Algebraic {#fs-id1165132957183}

For the following exercises, expand each logarithm as much as possible.
Rewrite each expression as a sum, difference, or product of logs.

log b ( 7x⋅2y )

log b ( 2 )+ log b ( 7 )+ log b ( x )+ log b ( y )

ln( 3ab⋅5c )

log b ( 13 17 )

log b ( 13 )− log b ( 17 )

log 4 ( x z w )

ln( 1 4 k )

−kln(4)

log 2 ( y x )

For the following exercises, condense to a single logarithm if possible.

ln( 7 )+ln( x )+ln( y )

ln( 7xy )

log 3 (2)+ log 3 (a)+ log 3 (11)+ log 3 (b)

log b (28)− log b (7)

log b (4)

ln( a )−ln( d )−ln( c )

− log b ( 1 7 )

log b ( 7 )

1 3 ln( 8 )

For the following exercises, use the properties of logarithms to expand
each logarithm as much as possible. Rewrite each expression as a sum,
difference, or product of logs.

log( x 15 y 13 z 19 )

15log(x)+13log(y)−19log(z)

ln( a −2 b −4 c 5 )

log( x 3 y −4 )

3 2 log(x)−2log(y)

ln( y y 1−y )

log( x 2 y 3 x 2 y 5 3 )

8 3 log(x)+ 14 3 log(y)

For the following exercises, condense each expression to a single
logarithm using the properties of logarithms.

log( 2 x 4 )+log( 3 x 5 )

ln(6 x 9 )−ln(3 x 2 )

ln(2 x 7 )

2log(x)+3log(x+1)

log(x)− 1 2 log(y)+3log(z)

log( x z 3 y )

4 log 7 ( c )+ log 7 ( a ) 3 + log 7 ( b ) 3

For the following exercises, rewrite each expression as an equivalent
ratio of logs using the indicated base.

log 7 ( 15 ) to base e

log 7 ( 15 )= ln( 15 ) ln( 7 )

log 14 ( 55.875 ) to base 10

For the following exercises, suppose log 5 ( 6 )=a and log 5 ( 11 )=b.
Use the change-of-base formula along with properties of logarithms to
rewrite each expression in terms of a and b. Show the steps for solving.

log 11 ( 5 )

log 11 ( 5 )= log 5 ( 5 ) log 5 ( 11 ) = 1 b

log 6 ( 55 )

log 11 ( 6 11 )

log 11 ( 6 11 )= log 5 ( 6 11 ) log 5 ( 11 ) = log 5 ( 6 )− log 5 ( 11 )
log 5 ( 11 ) = a−b b = a b −1

## Numeric {#fs-id1165135678539}

For the following exercises, use properties of logarithms to evaluate
without using a calculator.

log 3 ( 1 9 )−3 log 3 ( 3 )

6 log 8 ( 2 )+ log 8 ( 64 ) 3 log 8 ( 4 )

3

2 log 9 ( 3 )−4 log 9 ( 3 )+ log 9 ( 1 729 )

For the following exercises, use the change-of-base formula to evaluate
each expression as a quotient of natural logs. Use a calculator to
approximate each to five decimal places.

log 3 ( 22 )

2.81359

log 8 ( 65 )

log 6 ( 5.38 )

0.93913

log 4 ( 15 2 )

log 1 2 ( 4.7 )

−2.23266

## Extensions {#fs-id1165135650732}

Use the product rule for logarithms to find all x values such that log
12 ( 2x+6 )+ log 12 ( x+2 )=2. Show the steps for solving.

Use the quotient rule for logarithms to find all x values such that log
6 ( x+2 )− log 6 ( x−3 )=1. Show the steps for solving.

x=4; By the quotient rule: log 6 ( x+2 )− log 6 ( x−3 )= log 6 ( x+2 x−3
)=1.

Rewriting as an exponential equation and solving for x:

6 1 = x+2 x−3 (after multiplying both sides by (x-3)) 6 (x-3) = x+2
(carry out distributive multiplication on left) 6x-18 = x+2 (add18to
both sides, subtractxfrom both sides) 5x = 20 ​x =4

Checking, we find that log 6 ( 4+2 )− log 6 ( 4−3 )= log 6 ( 6 )− log 6
( 1 ) is defined, so x=4.

Can the power property of logarithms be derived from the power property
of exponents using the equation b x =m? If not, explain why. If so, show
the derivation.

Prove that log b ( n )= 1 log n ( b ) for any positive integers b\>1 and
n\>1.

Let b and n be positive integers greater than 1. Then, by the
change-of-base formula, log b ( n )= log n ( n ) log n ( b ) = 1 log n (
b ) .

Does log 81 ( 2401 )= log 3 ( 7 )? Verify the claim algebraically.

# 

change-of-base formula

a formula for converting a logarithm with any base to a quotient of
logarithms with any other base.

power rule for logarithms

a rule of logarithms that states that the log of a power is equal to the
product of the exponent and the log of its base

product rule for logarithms

a rule of logarithms that states that the log of a product is equal to a
sum of logarithms

quotient rule for logarithms

a rule of logarithms that states that the log of a quotient is equal to
a difference of logarithms
