m49366

> In this section, you will:
>
> Use like bases to solve exponential equations.
>
> Use logarithms to solve exponential equations.
>
> Use the definition of a logarithm to solve logarithmic equations.
>
> Use the one-to-one property of logarithms to solve logarithmic
> equations.
>
> Solve applied problems involving exponential and logarithmic
> equations.

c1f8641f-2121-4457-adc2-ef58f23500ce

#  {#eip-797}

## Learning Objectives {#eip-128}

Solve Exponential Equations. (IA 10.2.2)

Solve Logarithmic Equations. (IA 10.3.4)

## Objective 1: Solve Exponential Equations. (IA 10.2.2) {#eip-770}

Equations that include an exponential expression ax are called
exponential equations. There are two types of exponential equations:
those with the common base on each side, and those without a common
base.

*Type 1*: Possible common base on each side: Use properties of exponents
to rewrite each side with a common base. Use base-exponent property to
set exponents equal to each other and solve for x.

:::: {#eip-423 .note}
::: title
Base-Exponent Property
:::

For any

a

\>

0

,

a

≠

1

, if

a

x

=

a

y

then

x

=

y
::::

*Type 2*: No possible common base: Use properties of exponents to
rewrite each side in terms of one exponential expression. Take the log
or ln of each side and use the power rule to bring down the power. Solve
the remaining equation for x.

:::: {#eip-237 .note}
::: title
Property of Logarithmic Equality:
:::

For any

M

\>

0

,

N

\>

0

,

a

\>

0

,

a

n

d

a

≠

1

If

log

a

M

=

log

b

N

then

M

=

N

.
::::

::: {#eip-488 .example}
Solve: 32x−5=27.

  -------------------------------------------------------------------- -----------------------------------------------------
  Is here a common base?                                               Yes, both 3 and 27 can be rewritten as powers of 3.
  Write both sides of the equation with the same base.                 32x-5=33
  Since the bases are the same, the exponents must be equal.           
  Write a new equation by setting the exponents equal.                 2x-5=3
  Solve the equation.                                                  2x=8
                                                                       x=4
  Check the solution by substituting x=4 into the original equation.   32(4)-5=27
                                                                       27=27, True
  -------------------------------------------------------------------- -----------------------------------------------------
:::

::: {#eip-532 .example}
Solve 3ex+2=24 . Find the exact answer and then approximate it to three
decimal places.

  ------------------------------------------------------------------- ----------------
  Rewriting with a common base is not possible.                       
  Isolate the exponential by dividing both sides by 3.                ex+2=8
  Take the natural logarithm of both sides.                           ln ex+2=ln 8
  Use the Power Property to get the x as a factor, not an exponent.   (x+2)ln e=ln 8
  Use the property lne=1 to simplify.                                 x+2=ln8
  Solve the equation. Find the exact answer.                          x=ln8-2
  Approximate the answer.                                             x=0.079
  ------------------------------------------------------------------- ----------------
:::

:::: {#eip-607 .note}
::: title
:::

Use the following steps to help solve the equation below. Is there a
common base? Isolate the variable term first to determine.

Solve 2(5x)=12 . Isolate the exponential term on one side. Take ln or
log of each side. Use the Power Property to get the x as a factor, not
an exponent. Solve for x. Give an exact answer and approximate. Check.
::::

:::: {#eip-271 .note}
::: title
:::

Use the following steps to help solve the equation below.

Solve   23x-4=8-x. Is here a common base here? Yes, both 2 and 8 can be
rewritten as powers of 2. Rewrite each side with a base of 2 using
properties of exponents. Set exponents equal since the bases are the
same. Solve for x. Give an exact answer and approximate. Check.
::::

### Practice Makes Perfect {#eip-639}

Solve. Find the exact answer and then approximate it to three decimal
places.

42x-3=116

5(3x)=20

## Objective 2: Solving Logarithmic Equations. (IA 10.3.4) {#eip-604}

There are two types of logarithmic equations: those with log terms on
just one side of the equation or those with log terms on each side of
the equation. Since the domain of logarithmic functions is positive
numbers only, make sure to check the solutions.

*Type 1*: Log terms on one side of the equation: Use properties of logs
to rewrite a side with just one log term. Convert to exponential
notation and solve for x.

If logax=y then x=ay .

*Type 2*: Log terms on both sides of equation: First, use log properties
to rewrite each side in terms of a single log expression, if necessary.
Use the one-to-one property of logarithmic equality to set arguments
equal to one another. Solve the resulting equation for x.

:::: {#eip-628 .note}
::: title
One-to-One Property of Logarithmic Equations
:::

For any M\>0,N\>0,a\>0, and a≠1 is any real number:

$$\text{If}\ \text{log}_{a}M = \text{log}_{a}N,\ \text{then}\ M = N.$$
::::

::: {#eip-736 .example}
Solve: log2(3x-5)=4 

  ------------------------------ ----------------
  Rewrite in exponential form.   24=3x-5
  Simplify.                      16=3x-5
  Solve for x.                   x=7
  Check.                         log2(3(7)-5)=4
                                 4=4, True
  ------------------------------ ----------------
:::

::: {#eip-373 .example}
Solve log4(x+6)-log4(2x+5)=-log4x

  --------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Use the Quotient Property on the left side and the Power Property on the right.   log4 x+62x+5=log4x-1
  Rewrite x-1 as 1x.                                                                log4 x+62x+5=log41x
  Use the One-to-One Property.                                                      x+62x+5=1x
  Solve the rational equation.                                                      x(x+6)=2x+5
  Distribute and write in standard form.                                            x2+4x-5=0
  Factor and solve for x.                                                           (x+5)(x-1)=0 , x=-5 , x=1
  Check:                                                                            x=--5 is extraneous solution because 2(-5)+5\<0 so x=1 is the only solution.
  --------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ------------------------------------------------------------------------------
:::

:::: {#eip-275 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Use the following steps to help solve the equation below.

Solve log(x+2)-log 3=1

Use properties of logarithms to rewrite the left side as a single log
term.

Convert to exponential form.

Solve for x. Check.
::::

:::: {#eip-836 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Use the following steps to help solve the equation below.

Solve logx+log (x+1) =2

Use properties of logarithms to rewrite the left side as a single log
term.

Use the One-to-One Property.

Solve the quadratic equation.

Check.
::::

### Practice Makes Perfect {#eip-177}

Don't forget to check your solutions.

log3x=5

log2(x+1)+log2(x-1)=3

log(x-2)-log(4x+16)=log1x

<figure id="CNX_Precalc_Figure_04_06_001">

</figure>

In 1859, an Australian landowner named Thomas Austin released 24 rabbits
into the wild for hunting. Because Australia had few predators and ample
food, the rabbit population exploded. In fewer than ten years, the
rabbit population numbered in the millions.

Uncontrolled population growth, as in the wild rabbits in Australia, can
be modeled with exponential functions. Equations resulting from those
exponential functions can be solved to analyze and make predictions
about exponential growth. In this section, we will learn techniques for
solving exponential functions.

# Using Like Bases to Solve Exponential Equations {#fs-id1165137748966}

The first technique involves two functions with like bases. Recall that
the one-to-one property of exponential functions tells us that, for any
real numbers b, S, and T, where b\>0,b≠1, b S = b T if and only if S=T.

In other words, when an exponential equation has the same base on each
side, the exponents must be equal. This also applies when the exponents
are algebraic expressions. Therefore, we can solve many exponential
equations by using the rules of exponents to rewrite each side as a
power with the same base. Then, we use the fact that exponential
functions are one-to-one to set the exponents equal to one another, and
solve for the unknown.

For example, consider the equation 3 4x−7 = 3 2x 3 . To solve for x, we
use the division property of exponents to rewrite the right side so that
both sides have the common base, 3. Then we apply the one-to-one
property of exponents by setting the exponents equal to one another and
solving for x :

$$\begin{array}{lll}
3^{4x - 7} & {= \frac{3^{2x}}{3}} & \\
3^{4x - 7} & {= \frac{3^{2x}}{3^{1}}} & {\text{Rewrite~3~as~3}^{1}.} \\
3^{4x - 7} & {= 3^{2x - 1}} & {\text{Use~the~division~property~of~exponents}\text{.}} \\
{4x - 7} & {= 2x - 1\mspace{9mu}\mspace{9mu}\mspace{9mu}} & {\text{Apply~the~one-to-one~property~of~exponents}\text{.}} \\
{2x} & {= 6} & {\text{Subtract~2}x\mspace{7mu}\text{and~add~7~to~both~sides}\text{.}} \\
x & {= 3} & {\text{Divide~by~2}\text{.}}
\end{array}$$

:::: {#fs-id1165137634286 .note}
::: title
Using the One-to-One Property of Exponential Functions to Solve
Exponential Equations
:::

For any algebraic expressions Sand T, and any positive real number b≠1,

$$b^{S} = b^{T}\mspace{7mu}\text{if~and~only~if}\mspace{7mu} S = T$$
::::

:::: {#fs-id1165137540162 .note}
::: title
:::

How To

*Given an exponential equation with the form b S = b T , where S and T
are algebraic expressions with an unknown, solve for the unknown.*

Use the rules of exponents to simplify, if necessary, so that the
resulting equation has the form

b

S

=

b

T

.

Use the one-to-one property to set the exponents equal.

Solve the resulting equation,

S

=

T

,

for the unknown.
::::

::: {#Example_04_06_01 .example}
Solve 2 x−1 = 2 2x−4 .

$$\begin{array}{ll}
{~2^{x - 1} = 2^{2x - 4}} & {\text{The~common~base~is~}2.} \\
{x - 1 = 2x - 4\begin{array}{llll}
 & & & 
\end{array}} & {\text{By~the~one-to-one~property~the~exponents~must~be~equal}.} \\
{x = 3} & {\text{Solve~for~}x.}
\end{array}$$
:::

:::: {#fs-id1165137748360 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Solve 5 2x = 5 3x+2 .

x=−2
::::

## Rewriting Equations So All Powers Have the Same Base {#fs-id1165137667260}

Sometimes the common base for an exponential equation is not explicitly
shown. In these cases, we simply rewrite the terms in the equation as
powers with a common base, and solve using the one-to-one property.

For example, consider the equation 256= 4 x−5 . We can rewrite both
sides of this equation as a power of 2. Then we apply the rules of
exponents, along with the one-to-one property, to solve for x:

$$\begin{array}{ll}
{256 = 4^{x - 5}} & \\
{2^{8} = \left( 2^{2} \right)^{x - 5}} & {\text{Rewrite~each~side~as~a~power~with~base~2}.} \\
{2^{8} = 2^{2x - 10}} & {\text{Use~the~one-to-one~property~of~exponents}.} \\
{8 = 2x - 10\begin{array}{llll}
 & & & 
\end{array}} & {\text{Apply~the~one-to-one~property~of~exponents}.} \\
{18 = 2x} & {\text{Add~10~to~both~sides}.} \\
{x = 9} & {\text{Divide~by~2}.}
\end{array}$$

:::: {#fs-id1165135321969 .note}
::: title
:::

How To

*Given an exponential equation with unlike bases, use the one-to-one
property to solve it.*

Rewrite each side in the equation as a power with a common base.

Use the rules of exponents to simplify, if necessary, so that the
resulting equation has the form

b

S

=

b

T

.

Use the one-to-one property to set the exponents equal.

Solve the resulting equation,

S

=

T

,

for the unknown.
::::

::: {#Example_04_06_02 .example}
Solve 8 x+2 = 16 x+1 .

$$\begin{array}{ll}
{8^{x + 2} = 16^{x + 1}} & \\
{\left( 2^{3} \right)^{x + 2} = \left( 2^{4} \right)^{x + 1}} & {\text{Write}\mspace{9mu} 8\mspace{9mu}\text{and}\mspace{9mu} 16\mspace{9mu}\text{as~powers~of}\mspace{9mu} 2.} \\
{2^{3x + 6} = 2^{4x + 4}} & {\text{To~take~a~power~of~a~power,~multiply~exponents}.} \\
{3x + 6 = 4x + 4} & {\text{Use~the~one-to-one~property~to~set~the~exponents~equal}.} \\
{x = 2} & {\text{Solve~for~}x.}
\end{array}$$
:::

:::: {#fs-id1165135557891 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Solve 5 2x = 25 3x+2 .

x=−1
::::

::: {#Example_04_06_03 .example}
Solve 2 5x = 2 .

$$\begin{array}{ll}
{2^{5x} = 2^{\frac{1}{2}}} & {\text{Write~the~square~root~of~~2~as~a~power~of}\mspace{9mu} 2.} \\
{5x = \frac{1}{2}} & {\text{Use~the~one-to-one~property}.} \\
{x = \frac{1}{10}} & {\text{Solve~for}\mspace{9mu} x.}
\end{array}$$
:::

:::: {#fs-id1165137423838 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Solve 5 x = 5 .

x= 1 2
::::

:::: {#fs-id1165135369638 .note}
::: title
:::

Q&A

*Do all exponential equations have a solution? If not, how can we tell
if there is a solution during the problem-solving process?*

*No. Recall that the range of an exponential function is always
positive. While solving the equation, we may obtain an expression that
is undefined.*
::::

::: {#Example_04_06_04 .example}
Solve 3 x+1 =−2.

This equation has no solution. There is no real value of x that will
make the equation a true statement because any power of a positive
number is positive.

[\#](#) shows that the two graphs do not cross so the left side is never
equal to the right side. Thus the equation has no solution.

<figure id="CNX_Precalc_Figure_04_06_002">

</figure>
:::

:::: {#fs-id1165137920668 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Solve 2 x =−100.

The equation has no solution.
::::

# Solving Exponential Equations Using Logarithms {#fs-id1165137641700}

Sometimes the terms of an exponential equation cannot be rewritten with
a common base. In these cases, we solve by taking the logarithm of each
side. Recall, since log( a )=log( b ) is equivalent to a=b, we may apply
logarithms with the same base on both sides of an exponential equation.

:::: {#fs-id1165137939925 .note}
::: title
:::

How To

*Given an exponential equation in which a common base cannot be found,
solve for the unknown.*

Apply the logarithm of both sides of the equation.

If one of the terms in the equation has base 10, use the common
logarithm.

If none of the terms in the equation has base 10, use the natural
logarithm.

Use the rules of logarithms to solve for the unknown.
::::

::: {#Example_04_06_05 .example}
Solve 5 x+2 = 4 x .

$$\begin{array}{ll}
{5^{x + 2} = 4^{x}} & {\text{There is no easy way to get the powers to have the same base}.} \\
{\ln 5^{x + 2} = \ln 4^{x}} & {\text{Take ln of both sides}.} \\
{(x + 2)\ln 5 = x\ln 4} & {\text{Use laws of logs}.} \\
{x\ln 5 + 2\ln 5 = x\ln 4} & {\text{Use the distributive law}.} \\
{x\ln 5 - x\ln 4 = - 2\ln 5} & {\text{Get terms containing}\mspace{7mu} x\mspace{7mu}\text{on one side, terms without}\mspace{7mu} x\mspace{7mu}\text{on the other}.} \\
{x(\ln 5 - \ln 4) = - 2\ln 5} & {\text{On the left hand side, factor out an}x.} \\
{x\ln\left( \frac{5}{4} \right) = \ln\left( \frac{1}{25} \right)\begin{array}{llll}
 & & & 
\end{array}} & \text{Use the laws of logs.} \\
{x = \frac{\ln\left( \frac{1}{25} \right)}{\ln\left( \frac{5}{4} \right)}} & {\text{Divide by the coefficient of}\mspace{7mu} x.}
\end{array}$$
:::

:::: {#fs-id1165137473583 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Solve 2 x = 3 x+1 .

x= ln3 ln( 2 3 )
::::

:::: {#fs-id1165137470141 .note}
::: title
:::

Q&A

*Is there any way to solve 2 x = 3 x ?*

*Yes. The solution is 0.*
::::

## Equations Containing *e* {#fs-id1165137469838}

One common type of exponential equations are those with base e. This
constant occurs again and again in nature, in mathematics, in science,
in engineering, and in finance. When we have an equation with a base e
on either side, we can use the natural logarithm to solve it.

:::: {#fs-id1165137727175 .note}
::: title
:::

How To

*Given an equation of the form y=A e kt , solve for t.*

Divide both sides of the equation by

A

.

Apply the natural logarithm of both sides of the equation.

Divide both sides of the equation by

k

.
::::

::: {#Example_04_06_06 .example}
Solve 100=20 e 2t .

$$\begin{array}{lll}
100 & {= 20e^{2t}} & \\
5 & {= e^{2t}} & \text{Divide~by~the~coefficient~of~the~power.} \\
{\ln 5} & {= 2t} & {\text{Take~ln~of~both~sides}\text{.~Use~the~fact~that~}\ln(x)\mspace{7mu}\text{and~}e^{x}\mspace{9mu}\text{are~inverse~functions}\text{.}} \\
t & {= \frac{\ln 5}{2}} & {\text{Divide~by~the~coefficient~of~}t\text{.}}
\end{array}$$

Using laws of logs, we can also write this answer in the form t=ln 5 .
If we want a decimal approximation of the answer, we use a calculator.
:::

:::: {#fs-id1165135186732 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Solve 3 e 0.5t =11.

t=2ln( 11 3 ) or ln ( 11 3 ) 2
::::

:::: {#fs-id1165137532335 .note}
::: title
:::

Q&A

*Does every equation of the form* y=A e kt *have a solution?*

*No. There is a solution when k≠0, and when y and A are either both 0 or
neither 0, and they have the same sign. An example of an equation with
this form that has no solution is 2=−3 e t .*
::::

::: {#Example_04_06_07 .example}
Solve 4 e 2x +5=12.

$$\begin{array}{ll}
{4e^{2x} + 5 = 12} & \\
{4e^{2x} = 7} & {\text{Combine~like~terms}.} \\
{e^{2x} = \frac{7}{4}} & {\text{Divide~by~the~coefficient~of~the~power}.} \\
{2x = \ln\left( \frac{7}{4} \right)} & {\text{Take~ln~of~both~sides}.} \\
{x = \frac{1}{2}\ln\left( \frac{7}{4} \right)} & {\text{Solve~for~}x.}
\end{array}$$
:::

:::: {#fs-id1165137827163 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Solve 3+ e 2t =7 e 2t .

t=ln( 1 2 )=− 1 2 ln( 2 )
::::

## Extraneous Solutions {#fs-id1165137665482}

Sometimes the methods used to solve an equation introduce an extraneous
solution, which is a solution that is correct algebraically but does not
satisfy the conditions of the original equation. One such situation
arises in solving when the logarithm is taken on both sides of the
equation. In such cases, remember that the argument of the logarithm
must be positive. If the number we are evaluating in a logarithm
function is negative, there is no output.

::: {#Example_04_06_08 .example}
Solve e 2x − e x =56.

$$\begin{array}{rll}
{e^{2x} - e^{x}} & {= 56} & \\
{e^{2x} - e^{x} - 56} & {= 0} & {\text{Get one side of the equation equal to zero}.} \\
{(e^{x} + 7)(e^{x} - 8)} & {= 0} & {\text{Factor by the FOIL method}.} \\
{e^{x} + 7} & {= 0\mspace{7mu}\text{or}e^{x} - 8 = 0\begin{array}{llll}
 & & & 
\end{array}} & {\text{If a product is zero, then one factor must be zero}.} \\
e^{x} & {= - 7{\mspace{7mu}\text{or e}}^{x} = 8} & {\text{Isolate the exponentials}.} \\
e^{x} & {= 8} & {\text{Reject the equation in which the power equals a negative number}.} \\
x & {= \ln 8} & {\text{Solve the equation in which the power equals a positive number}.}
\end{array}$$

When we plan to use factoring to solve a problem, we always get zero on
one side of the equation, because zero has the unique property that when
a product is zero, one or both of the factors must be zero. We reject
the equation e x =−7 because a positive number never equals a negative
number. The solution ln(−7) is not a real number, and in the real number
system this solution is rejected as an extraneous solution.
:::

:::: {#fs-id1165135560773 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Solve e 2x = e x +2.

x=ln2
::::

:::: {#fs-id1165137470353 .note}
::: title
:::

Q&A

*Does every logarithmic equation have a solution?*

*No. Keep in mind that we can only apply the logarithm to a positive
number. Always check for extraneous solutions.*
::::

# Using the Definition of a Logarithm to Solve Logarithmic Equations {#fs-id1165137862548}

We have already seen that every logarithmic equation log b ( x )=y is
equivalent to the exponential equation b y =x. We can use this fact,
along with the rules of logarithms, to solve logarithmic equations where
the argument is an algebraic expression.

For example, consider the equation log 2 ( 2 )+ log 2 ( 3x−5 )=3. To
solve this equation, we can use rules of logarithms to rewrite the left
side in compact form and then apply the definition of logs to solve for
x:

$$\begin{array}{ll}
{\log_{2}(2) + \log_{2}(3x - 5) = 3} & \\
{\log_{2}(2(3x - 5)) = 3} & \text{Apply the product rule of logarithms.} \\
{\log_{2}(6x - 10) = 3} & {\text{Distribute}.} \\
{2^{3} = 6x - 10} & {\text{Apply the definition of a logarithm}.} \\
{8 = 6x - 10\begin{array}{llll}
 & & & 
\end{array}} & {\text{Calculate}2^{3}.} \\
{18 = 6x} & {\text{Add 10 to both sides}.} \\
{x = 3} & {\text{Divide by 6}.}
\end{array}$$

:::: {#fs-id1165135516879 .note}
::: title
Using the Definition of a Logarithm to Solve Logarithmic Equations
:::

For any algebraic expression S and real numbers b and c, where b\>0,b≠1,

$$\log_{b}(S) = c\mspace{9mu}\mspace{9mu}\text{if~and~only~if}\mspace{9mu}\mspace{9mu} b^{c} = S$$
::::

::: {#Example_04_06_09 .example}
Solve 2lnx+3=7.

$$\begin{array}{ll}
{2\ln x + 3 = 7} & \\
{2\ln x = 4} & {\text{Subtract~3}.} \\
{\ln x = 2} & {\text{Divide~by~2}.} \\
{x = e^{2}} & {\text{Rewrite~in~exponential~form}.}
\end{array}$$
:::

:::: {#fs-id1165137571063 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Solve 6+lnx=10.

x= e 4
::::

::: {#Example_04_06_10 .example}
Solve 2ln(6x)=7.

$$\begin{array}{ll}
{2\ln(6x) = 7} & \\
{\ln(6x) = \frac{7}{2}} & {\text{Divide~by~2}.} \\
{6x = e^{(\frac{7}{2})}} & {\text{Use~the~definition~of~}\ln.} \\
{x = \frac{1}{6}e^{(\frac{7}{2})}} & {\text{Divide~by~6}.}
\end{array}$$
:::

:::: {#fs-id1165137441761 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Solve 2ln(x+1)=10.

x= e 5 −1
::::

::: {#Example_04_06_11 .example}
Solve lnx=3.

$$\begin{array}{ll}
{\ln x = 3} & \\
{x = e^{3}} & {\text{Use~the~definition~of~the~natural~logarithm}\text{.}}
\end{array}$$

[\#](#) represents the graph of the equation. On the graph, the
*x*-coordinate of the point at which the two graphs intersect is close
to 20. In other words e 3 ≈20. A calculator gives a better
approximation: e 3 ≈20.0855.

<figure id="CNX_Precalc_Figure_04_06_003">

</figure>
:::

:::: {#fs-id1165137401539 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Use a graphing calculator to estimate the approximate solution to the
logarithmic equation 2 x =1000 to 2 decimal places.

x≈9.97
::::

# Using the One-to-One Property of Logarithms to Solve Logarithmic Equations {#fs-id1165137755280}

As with exponential equations, we can use the one-to-one property to
solve logarithmic equations. The one-to-one property of logarithmic
functions tells us that, for any real numbers x\>0, S\>0, T\>0 and any
positive real number b, where b≠1,

$$\log_{b}S = \log_{b}T\mspace{9mu}\text{if~and~only~if~}S = T.$$

For example,

$$\text{If~~}\log_{2}(x - 1) = \log_{2}(8),\text{then~}x - 1 = 8.$$

So, if x−1=8, then we can solve for x, and we get x=9. To check, we can
substitute x=9 into the original equation: log 2 ( 9−1 )= log 2 ( 8 )=3.
In other words, when a logarithmic equation has the same base on each
side, the arguments must be equal. This also applies when the arguments
are algebraic expressions. Therefore, when given an equation with logs
of the same base on each side, we can use rules of logarithms to rewrite
each side as a single logarithm. Then we use the fact that logarithmic
functions are one-to-one to set the arguments equal to one another and
solve for the unknown.

For example, consider the equation log( 3x−2 )−log( 2 )=log( x+4 ). To
solve this equation, we can use the rules of logarithms to rewrite the
left side as a single logarithm, and then apply the one-to-one property
to solve for x:

$$\begin{array}{ll}
{\log(3x - 2) - \log(2) = \log(x + 4)} & \\
{\log\left( \frac{3x - 2}{2} \right) = \log(x + 4)} & {\text{Apply~the~quotient~rule~of~logarithms}.} \\
{\frac{3x - 2}{2} = x + 4} & {\text{Apply~the~one~to~one~property~of~a~logarithm}.} \\
{3x - 2 = 2x + 8} & {\text{Multiply~both~sides~of~the~equation~by~}2.} \\
{x = 10} & {\text{Subtract~2}x\mspace{9mu}\text{and~add~2}.}
\end{array}$$

To check the result, substitute x=10 into log( 3x−2 )−log( 2 )=log( x+4
).

$$\begin{array}{ll}
{\log(3(10) - 2) - \log(2) = \log((10) + 4)} & \\
{\log(28) - \log(2) = \log(14)} & \\
{\log\left( \frac{28}{2} \right) = \log(14)} & {\text{The~solution~checks}.}
\end{array}$$

:::: {#fs-id1165137538838 .note}
::: title
Using the One-to-One Property of Logarithms to Solve Logarithmic
Equations
:::

For any algebraic expressions S and T and any positive real number b,
where b≠1,

$$\log_{b}S = \log_{b}T\mspace{9mu}\mspace{9mu}\text{if~and~only~if}\mspace{9mu}\mspace{9mu} S = T$$

Note, when solving an equation involving logarithms, always check to see
if the answer is correct or if it is an extraneous solution.
::::

:::: {#fs-id1165137592114 .note}
::: title
:::

How To

*Given an equation containing logarithms, solve it using the one-to-one
property.*

Use the rules of logarithms to combine like terms, if necessary, so that
the resulting equation has the form

log

b

S

=

log

b

T

.

Use the one-to-one property to set the arguments equal.

Solve the resulting equation,

S

=

T

,

for the unknown.
::::

::: {#Example_04_06_12 .example}
Solve ln( x 2 )=ln(2x+3).

$$\begin{array}{ll}
{\ln(x^{2}) = \ln(2x + 3)} & \\
{x^{2} = 2x + 3} & {\text{Use~the~one-to-one~property~of~the~logarithm}.} \\
{x^{2} - 2x - 3 = 0} & {\text{Get~zero~on~one~side~before~factoring}.} \\
{(x - 3)(x + 1) = 0} & {\text{Factor~using~FOIL}.} \\
{x - 3 = 0\mspace{9mu}\text{or~}x + 1 = 0\begin{array}{llll}
 & & & 
\end{array}} & {\text{If~a~product~is~zero,~one~of~the~factors~must~be~zero}.} \\
{x = 3\mspace{7mu}\text{or}\mspace{7mu} x = - 1} & {\text{Solve~for~}x.}
\end{array}$$

There are two solutions: 3 or −1. The solution −1 is negative, but it
checks when substituted into the original equation because the argument
of the logarithm functions is still positive.
:::

:::: {#fs-id1165135189970 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Solve ln( x 2 )=ln1.

x=1 or x=−1
::::

# Solving Applied Problems Using Exponential and Logarithmic Equations {#fs-id1165137828382}

In previous sections, we learned the properties and rules for both
exponential and logarithmic functions. We have seen that any exponential
function can be written as a logarithmic function and vice versa. We
have used exponents to solve logarithmic equations and logarithms to
solve exponential equations. We are now ready to combine our skills to
solve equations that model real-world situations, whether the unknown is
in an exponent or in the argument of a logarithm.

One such application is in science, in calculating the time it takes for
half of the unstable material in a sample of a radioactive substance to
decay, called its half-life. [\#](#) lists the half-life for several of
the more common radioactive substances.

  Substance        Use                    Half-life
  ---------------- ---------------------- -------------------
  gallium-67       nuclear medicine       80 hours
  cobalt-60        manufacturing          5.3 years
  technetium-99m   nuclear medicine       6 hours
  americium-241    construction           432 years
  carbon-14        archeological dating   5,730 years
  uranium-235      atomic power           703,800,000 years

We can see how widely the half-lives for these substances vary. Knowing
the half-life of a substance allows us to calculate the amount remaining
after a specified time. We can use the formula for radioactive decay:

$$\begin{array}{l}
{A(t) = A_{0}e^{\frac{\ln(0.5)}{T}t}} \\
{A(t) = A_{0}e^{\ln(0.5)\frac{t}{T}}} \\
{A(t) = A_{0}{(e^{\ln(0.5)})}^{\frac{t}{T}}} \\
{A(t) = A_{0}\left( \frac{1}{2} \right)^{\frac{t}{T}}}
\end{array}$$

where

A

0

is the amount initially present

T

is the half-life of the substance

t

is the time period over which the substance is studied

A

(

t

)

is the amount of the substance present after time

t

::: {#Example_04_06_13 .example}
How long will it take for ten percent of a 1000-gram sample of
uranium-235 to decay?

$$\begin{array}{ll}
{y = \text{1000}e\frac{\ln(0.5)}{\text{703,800,000}}t} & \\
{900 = 1000e^{\frac{\ln(0.5)}{\text{703,800,000}}t}} & {\text{After 10\% decays, 900 grams are left}.} \\
{0.9 = e^{\frac{\ln(0.5)}{\text{703,800,000}}t}} & {\text{Divide by 1000}.} \\
{\ln(0.9) = \ln\left( e^{\frac{\ln(0.5)}{\text{703,800,000}}t} \right)} & {\text{Take ln of both sides}.} \\
{\ln(0.9) = \frac{\ln(0.5)}{\text{703,800,000}}t} & {\text{ln}(e^{M}) = M} \\
{t = \text{703,800,000} \times \frac{\ln(0.9)}{\ln(0.5)}\text{years}\begin{array}{llll}
 & & & 
\end{array}} & {\text{Solve for}\mspace{7mu} t.} \\
{t \approx \text{106,979,777 years}} & 
\end{array}$$

Ten percent of 1000 grams is 100 grams. If 100 grams decay, the amount
of uranium-235 remaining is 900 grams.
:::

:::: {#fs-id1165135250678 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

How long will it take before twenty percent of our 1000-gram sample of
uranium-235 has decayed?

t=703,800,000× ln(0.8) ln(0.5) years ≈226,572,993years.
::::

:::: {#fs-id1165137410373 .note}
::: title
:::

Media

Access these online resources for additional instruction and practice
with exponential and logarithmic equations.

Solving Logarithmic Equations

Solving Exponential Equations with Logarithms
::::

# Key Equations {#fs-id1165135255941}

  ----------------------------------------------- ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  One-to-one property for exponential functions   For any algebraic expressions S and T and any positive real number b, where b S = b T if and only if S=T.
  Definition of a logarithm                       For any algebraic expression *S* and positive real numbers b  and c, where b≠1, log b (S)=c if and only if b c =S.
  One-to-one property for logarithmic functions   For any algebraic expressions *S* and *T* and any positive real number b, where b≠1, log b S= log b T if and only if S=T.
  ----------------------------------------------- ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Key Concepts {#fs-id1165137431646}

We can solve many exponential equations by using the rules of exponents
to rewrite each side as a power with the same base. Then we use the fact
that exponential functions are one-to-one to set the exponents equal to
one another and solve for the unknown.

When we are given an exponential equation where the bases are explicitly
shown as being equal, set the exponents equal to one another and solve
for the unknown. See

.

When we are given an exponential equation where the bases are

not

explicitly shown as being equal, rewrite each side of the equation as
powers of the same base, then set the exponents equal to one another and
solve for the unknown. See

,

, and

.

When an exponential equation cannot be rewritten with a common base,
solve by taking the logarithm of each side. See

.

We can solve exponential equations with base

e

,

by applying the natural logarithm of both sides because exponential and
logarithmic functions are inverses of each other. See

and

.

After solving an exponential equation, check each solution in the
original equation to find and eliminate any extraneous solutions. See

.

When given an equation of the form

log

b

(

S

)

=

c

,

where

S

is an algebraic expression, we can use the definition of a logarithm to
rewrite the equation as the equivalent exponential equation

b

c

=

S

,

and solve for the unknown. See

and

.

We can also use graphing to solve equations with the form

log

b

(

S

)

=

c

.

We graph both equations

y

=

log

b

(

S

)

and

y

=

c

on the same coordinate plane and identify the solution as the

x-

value of the intersecting point. See

.

When given an equation of the form

log

b

S

=

log

b

T

,

where

S

and

T

are algebraic expressions, we can use the one-to-one property of
logarithms to solve the equation

S

=

T

for the unknown. See

.

Combining the skills learned in this and previous sections, we can solve
equations that model real world situations, whether the unknown is in an
exponent or in the argument of a logarithm. See

.

# Section Exercises {#fs-id1165135415727}

## Verbal {#fs-id1165135415731}

How can an exponential equation be solved?

Determine first if the equation can be rewritten so that each side uses
the same base. If so, the exponents can be set equal to each other. If
the equation cannot be rewritten so that each side uses the same base,
then apply the logarithm to each side and use properties of logarithms
to solve.

When does an extraneous solution occur? How can an extraneous solution
be recognized?

When can the one-to-one property of logarithms be used to solve an
equation? When can it not be used?

The one-to-one property can be used if both sides of the equation can be
rewritten as a single logarithm with the same base. If so, the arguments
can be set equal to each other, and the resulting equation can be solved
algebraically. The one-to-one property cannot be used when each side of
the equation cannot be rewritten as a single logarithm with the same
base.

## Algebraic {#fs-id1165135160485}

For the following exercises, use like bases to solve the exponential
equation.

4 −3v−2 = 4 −v

64⋅ 4 3x =16

x=− 1 3

3 2x+1 ⋅ 3 x =243

2 −3n ⋅ 1 4 = 2 n+2

n=−1

625⋅ 5 3x+3 =125

36 3b 36 2b = 216 2−b

b= 6 5

( 1 64 ) 3n ⋅8= 2 6

For the following exercises, use logarithms to solve.

9 x−10 =1

x=10

2 e 6x =13

e r+10 −10=−42

No solution

2⋅ 10 9a =29

−8⋅ 10 p+7 −7=−24

p=log( 17 8 )−7

7 e 3n−5 +5=−89

e −3k +6=44

k=− ln( 38 ) 3

−5 e 9x−8 −8=−62

−6 e 9x+8 +2=−74

x= ln( 38 3 )−8 9

2 x+1 = 5 2x−1

e 2x − e x −132=0

x=ln12

7 e 8x+8 −5=−95

10 e 8x+3 +2=8

x= ln( 3 5 )−3 8

4 e 3x+3 −7=53

8 e −5x−2 −4=−90

no solution

3 2x+1 = 7 x−2

e 2x − e x −6=0

x=ln( 3 )

3 e 3−3x +6=−31

For the following exercises, use the definition of a logarithm to
rewrite the equation as an exponential equation.

log( 1 100 )=−2

10 −2 = 1 100

log 324 ( 18 )= 1 2

For the following exercises, use the definition of a logarithm to solve
the equation.

5 log 7 n=10

n=49

−8 log 9 x=16

4+ log 2 ( 9k )=2

k= 1 36

2log( 8n+4 )+6=10

10−4ln( 9−8x )=6

x= 9−e 8

For the following exercises, use the one-to-one property of logarithms
to solve.

ln( 10−3x )=ln( −4x )

log 13 ( 5n−2 )= log 13 ( 8−5n )

n=1

log( x+3 )−log( x )=log( 74 )

ln( −3x )=ln( x 2 −6x )

No solution

log 4 ( 6−m )= log 4 3m

ln( x−2 )−ln( x )=ln( 54 )

No solution

log 9 ( 2 n 2 −14n )= log 9 ( −45+ n 2 )

ln( x 2 −10 )+ln( 9 )=ln( 10 )

x=± 10 3

For the following exercises, solve each equation for x.

log(x+12)=log(x)+log(12)

ln(x)+ln(x−3)=ln(7x)

x=10

log 2 (7x+6)=3

ln( 7 )+ln( 2−4 x 2 )=ln( 14 )

x=0

log 8 ( x+6 )− log 8 ( x )= log 8 ( 58 )

ln( 3 )−ln( 3−3x )=ln( 4 )

x= 3 4

log 3 ( 3x )− log 3 ( 6 )= log 3 ( 77 )

## Graphical {#fs-id1165135186512}

For the following exercises, solve the equation for x, if there is a
solution*.* Then graph both sides of the equation, and observe the point
of intersection (if it exists) to verify the solution.

log 9 ( x )−5=−4

x=9

log 3 ( x )+3=2

ln( 3x )=2

x= e 2 3 ≈2.5

ln( x−5 )=1

log( 4 )+log( −5x )=2

x=−5

−7+ log 3 ( 4−x )=−6

ln( 4x−10 )−6=−5

x= e+10 4 ≈3.2

log( 4−2x )=log( −4x )

log 11 ( −2 x 2 −7x )= log 11 ( x−2 )

No solution

ln( 2x+9 )=ln( −5x )

log 9 ( 3−x )= log 9 ( 4x−8 )

x= 11 5 ≈2.2

log( x 2 +13 )=log( 7x+3 )

3 log 2 ( 10 ) −log( x−9 )=log( 44 )

x= 101 11 ≈9.2

ln( x )−ln( x+3 )=ln( 6 )

For the following exercises, solve for the indicated value, and graph
the situation showing the solution point.

An account with an initial deposit of \$6,500 earns 7.25% annual
interest, compounded continuously. How much will the account be worth
after 20 years?

about \$27,710.24

The formula for measuring sound intensity in decibels D is defined by
the equation D=10log( I I 0 ), where I is the intensity of the sound in
watts per square meter and I 0 = 10 −12 is the lowest level of sound
that the average person can hear. How many decibels are emitted from a
jet plane with a sound intensity of 8.3⋅ 10 2 watts per square meter?

The population of a small town is modeled by the equation P=1650 e 0.5t
where t is measured in years. In approximately how many years will the
town's population reach 20,000?

about 5 years

## Technology {#fs-id1165137405607}

For the following exercises, solve each equation by rewriting the
exponential expression using the indicated logarithm. Then use a
calculator to approximate the variable to 3 decimal places.

1000 ( 1.03 ) t =5000 using the common log.

e 5x =17 using the natural log

ln(17) 5 ≈0.567

3 ( 1.04 ) 3t =8 using the common log

3 4x−5 =38 using the common log

x= log( 38 )+5log( 3 )   4log( 3 ) ≈2.078

50 e −0.12t =10 using the natural log

For the following exercises, use a calculator to solve the equation.
Unless indicated otherwise, round all answers to the nearest
ten-thousandth.

7 e 3x−5 +7.9=47

x≈2.2401

ln( 3 )+ln( 4.4x+6.8 )=2

log( −0.7x−9 )=1+5log( 5 )

x≈−44655.7143

Atmospheric pressure P in pounds per square inch is represented by the
formula P=14.7 e −0.21x , where x is the number of miles above sea
level. To the nearest foot, how high is the peak of a mountain with an
atmospheric pressure of 8.369 pounds per square inch? (*Hint*: there are
5280 feet in a mile)

The magnitude *M* of an earthquake is represented by the equation M= 2 3
log( E E 0 ) where E is the amount of energy released by the earthquake
in joules and E 0 = 10 4.4 is the assigned minimal measure released by
an earthquake. To the nearest hundredth, what would the magnitude be of
an earthquake releasing 1.4⋅ 10 13 joules of energy?

about 5.83

## Extensions {#fs-id1165134575932}

Use the definition of a logarithm along with the one-to-one property of
logarithms to prove that b log b x =x.

Recall the formula for continually compounding interest, y=A e kt . Use
the definition of a logarithm along with properties of logarithms to
solve the formula for time t such that t is equal to a single logarithm.

t=ln( ( y A ) 1 k )

Recall the compound interest formula A=a ( 1+ r k ) kt . Use the
definition of a logarithm along with properties of logarithms to solve
the formula for time t.

Newton's Law of Cooling states that the temperature T of an object at
any time *t* can be described by the equation T= T s +( T 0 − T s ) e
−kt , where T s is the temperature of the surrounding environment, T 0
is the initial temperature of the object, and k is the cooling rate. Use
the definition of a logarithm along with properties of logarithms to
solve the formula for time t such that t is equal to a single logarithm.

t=ln( ( T− T s T 0 − T s ) − 1 k )

# 

extraneous solution

a solution introduced while solving an equation that does not satisfy
the conditions of the original equation
