m49367

> In this section, you will:
>
> Model exponential growth and decay.
>
> Use Newton's Law of Cooling.
>
> Use logistic-growth models.
>
> Choose an appropriate model for data.
>
> Express an exponential model in base
>
> e
>
> .

feda96a1-a0f3-41ce-9d42-43eef361a909

#  {#eip-256}

## Learning Objectives {#eip-704}

Use exponential models in applications. (IA 10.2.3)

Use logarithmic models in applications. (IA 10.3.5)

## Objective 1: Use exponential models in applications. (IA 10.2.3) {#eip-280}

:::: {#eip-131 .note}
::: title
Vocabulary
:::

Fill in the blanks.

An

Exponential Function

is the function in the form

f

(

x

)

=

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_, where

a

\>

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_.

The

Natural Exponential Function

is an exponential function whose base is \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_.

This

irrational number

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ approximately equals \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_.
::::

### Using exponential models {#eip-824}

Exponential functions model many situations. If you have a savings
account, you have experienced the use of an exponential function. There
are two formulas that are used to determine the balance in the account
when interest is earned. If a principal, *P*, is invested at an interest
rate, *r*, for *t* years, the new balance, *A*, will depend on how often
the interest is compounded.

:::: {#eip-522 .note}
::: title
Compound Interest
:::

For a principal, *P*, invested at an interest rate, *r*, for *t* years,
the new balance, *A*, is:

$$\begin{array}{lccccl}
 & & & & & \\
 & & & & & \\
{A = P\left( {1 + \frac{r}{n}} \right)^{nt}} & & & & & {\text{when compounded}\ n\ \text{times a year.}} \\
{A = Pe^{rt}} & & & & & \text{when compounded continuously.}
\end{array}$$
::::

::: {#eip-230 .example}
A total of \$10,000 was invested in a college fund for a new grandchild.

ⓐ If the interest rate is 5%, how much will be in the account in 18
years by each method of compounding?

ⓑ compound quarterly

ⓒ compound monthly

ⓓ compound continuously

ⓐ

  ------------------------------------------------------- ------------
                                                          A=?
  Identify the values of each variable in the formulas.   P=\$10,000
  Remember to express the percent as a decimal.           r=0.05
                                                          t=18years
  ------------------------------------------------------- ------------

ⓑ

  ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- -----------------------
  For quarterly compounding, n=4. There are 4 quarters in a year.                                                        A=P(1+rn)nt
  Substitute the values in the formula.                                                                                  A=10,000(1+0.054)4·18
  Compute the amount. Be careful to consider the order of operations as you enter the expression into your calculator.   A=\$24,459.20
  ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- -----------------------

ⓒ

  ---------------------------------------------------------------- -------------------------
  For monthly compounding, n=12 . There are 12 months in a year.   A=P(1+rn)nt
  Substitute the values in the formula.                            A=10,000(1+0.0512)12·18
  Compute the amount.                                              A=\$24,550.08
  ---------------------------------------------------------------- -------------------------

ⓓ

  --------------------------------------- ------------------
  For compounding continuously,           A=Pert
  Substitute the values in the formula.   A=10,000e0.05·18
  Compute the amount.                     A=\$24,596.03
  --------------------------------------- ------------------
:::

### Exponential Growth and Decay {#eip-407}

Other topics that are modeled by exponential functions involve growth
and decay. Both also use the formula A=Pert we used for the growth of
money. For growth and decay, generally we use A0, as the original amount
instead of calling it P, the principal. We see that exponential growth
has a positive rate of growth and exponential decay has a negative rate
of growth.

:::: {#eip-435 .note}
::: title
Exponential Growth and Decay
:::

For an original amount, A0, that grows or decays at a rate, *r*, for a
certain time, *t*, the final amount, *A*, is:

$$A = A_{0}e^{rt}$$
::::

::: {#eip-822 .example}
Chris is a researcher at the Center for Disease Control and Prevention
and he is trying to understand the behavior of a new and dangerous
virus. He starts his experiment with 100 of the virus that grows at a
rate of 25% per hour. He will check on the virus in 24 hours. How many
viruses will he find? Identify the values of each variable in the
formulas. A=? Be sure to put the percent in decimal form. A0=100 Be sure
the units match---the rate is per hour and the time is in hours.
r=0.25/hour t=24hours Substitute the values in the formula: A=A0ert .
A=100e0.25·24 Compute the amount. A=40,342.88 Round to the nearest whole
virus. A=40,343 The researcher will find 40,343 viruses.
:::

### Practice Makes Perfect {#eip-874}

Angela invested \$15,000 in a savings account. If the interest rate is
4%, how much will be in the account in 10 years by each method of
compounding?

ⓐ compound quarterly

ⓑ compound monthly

ⓒ compound continuously

Another researcher at the Center for Disease Control and Prevention,
Lisa, is studying the growth of a bacteria. She starts her experiment
with 50 of the bacteria that grows at a rate of 15% per hour. She will
check on the bacteria every 8 hours. How many bacteria will she find in
8 hours?

## Objective 2: Use logarithmic models in applications. (IA 10.3.5) {#eip-970}

:::: {#eip-864 .note}
::: title
Vocabulary
:::

Fill in the blanks.

A

Logarithmic Function

is the function in the form

f

(

x

)

=

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_, where

a

\>

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_,

x

\>

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_, and

a

≠

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_.

The Logarithmic Function

f

(

x

)

=

l

n

x

is called the \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ and has a base \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_.
::::

### Decibel Level of Sound {#eip-185}

There are many applications that are modeled by logarithmic equations.
We will first look at the logarithmic equation that gives the decibel
(dB) level of sound. Decibels range from 0, which is barely audible to
160, which can rupture an eardrum. The10-12 in the formula represents
the intensity of sound that is barely audible.

:::: {#eip-253 .note}
::: title
:::

The loudness level, *D*, measured in decibels, of a sound of intensity,
*I*, measured in watts per square inch is

$$D = 10\ \text{log}\left( \frac{I}{10^{-12}} \right)$$
::::

::: {#eip-510 .example}
Use logarithmic models in applications.

Extended exposure to noise that measures 85 dB can cause permanent
damage to the inner ear which will result in hearing loss. What is the
decibel level of music coming through earphones with intensity 10-2
watts per square inch?

  --------------------------------------- ---------------------
  Substitute in the intensity level, I.   D=10 log(10-210-12)
  Simplify.                               D=10 log(1010)
  Since log1010=10                        D=10×10
  Multiply.                               D=100
  --------------------------------------- ---------------------
:::

The magnitude R of an earthquake is measured by a logarithmic scale
called the Richter scale. The model is R=logI, where I is the intensity
of the shock wave. This model provides a way to measure earthquake
intensity.

:::: {#eip-436 .note}
::: title
Earthquake Intensity
:::

The magnitude *R* of an earthquake is measured by R=logI, where *I* is
the intensity of its shock wave.
::::

::: {#eip-334 .example}
In 1906, San Francisco experienced an intense earthquake with a
magnitude of 7.8 on the Richter scale. Over 80% of the city was
destroyed by the resulting fires. In 2014, Los Angeles experienced a
moderate earthquake that measured 5.1 on the Richter scale and caused
\$108 million dollars of damage. Compare the intensities of the two
earthquakes.

To compare the intensities, we first need to convert the magnitudes to
intensities using the log formula. Then we will set up a ratio to
compare the intensities.

  ---------------------------------------- ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Convert the magnitudes to intensities.   R=logI
  1906 earthquake                          7.8=logI
  Convert to exponential form.             I=107.8
  2014 earthquake                          5.1=logI
  Convert to exponential form.             I=105.1
  Form a ratio of the intensities.         Intensityfor1906Intensityfor2014
  Substitute in the values.                107.8105.1
  Divide by subtracting the exponents.     102.7
  Evaluate.                                501
  Answer:                                  The intensity of the 1906 earthquake was about 501 times the intensity of the 2014 earthquake.
  ---------------------------------------- ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
:::

### Practice Makes Perfect {#eip-729}

Use logarithmic models in applications.

What is the decibel level of one of the new quiet dishwashers with
intensity 10−7 watts per square inch?

In 1906, San Francisco experienced an intense earthquake with a
magnitude of 7.8 on the Richter scale. In 1989, the Loma Prieta
earthquake also affected the San Francisco area, and measured 6.9 on the
Richter scale. Compare the intensities of the two earthquakes.

<figure id="CNX_Precalc_Figure_04_07_001">

</figure>

We have already explored some basic applications of exponential and
logarithmic functions. In this section, we explore some important
applications in more depth, including radioactive isotopes and Newton's
Law of Cooling.

# Modeling Exponential Growth and Decay {#fs-id1165135190498}

In real-world applications, we need to model the behavior of a function.
In mathematical modeling, we choose a familiar general function with
properties that suggest that it will model the real-world phenomenon we
wish to analyze. In the case of rapid growth, we may choose the
exponential growth function:

$$y = A_{0}e^{kt}$$

where A0 is equal to the value at time zero, e is Euler's constant, and
k is a positive constant that determines the rate (percentage) of
growth. We may use the exponential growth function in applications
involving *doubling time*, the time it takes for a quantity to double.
Such phenomena as wildlife populations, financial investments,
biological samples, and natural resources may exhibit growth based on a
doubling time. In some applications, however, as we will see when we
discuss the logistic equation, the logistic model sometimes fits the
data better than the exponential model.

On the other hand, if a quantity is falling rapidly toward zero, without
ever reaching zero, then we should probably choose the exponential decay
model. Again, we have the form y=A0ekt where A0 is the starting value,
and e is Euler's constant. Now k is a negative constant that determines
the rate of decay. We may use the exponential decay model when we are
calculating half-life, or the time it takes for a substance to
exponentially decay to half of its original quantity. We use half-life
in applications involving radioactive isotopes.

In our choice of a function to serve as a mathematical model, we often
use data points gathered by careful observation and measurement to
construct points on a graph and hope we can recognize the shape of the
graph. Exponential growth and decay graphs have a distinctive shape, as
we can see in [\#](#) and [\#](#). It is important to remember that,
although parts of each of the two graphs seem to lie on the *x*-axis,
they are really a tiny distance above the *x*-axis.

<figure id="CNX_Precalc_Figure_04_07_002">

</figure>

<figure id="CNX_Precalc_Figure_04_07_003">

</figure>

Exponential growth and decay often involve very large or very small
numbers. To describe these numbers, we often use orders of magnitude.
The order of magnitude is the power of ten, when the number is expressed
in scientific notation, with one digit to the left of the decimal. For
example, the distance to the nearest star, Proxima Centauri, measured in
kilometers, is 40,113,497,200,000 kilometers. Expressed in scientific
notation, this is 4.01134972×1013. So, we could describe this number as
having order of magnitude 1013.

:::: {#fs-id1165137414501 .note}
::: title
Characteristics of the Exponential Function, y=A0ekt
:::

An exponential function with the form y=A0ekt has the following
characteristics:

one-to-one function

horizontal asymptote:

y

=

0

domain:

(

--

∞

,

∞

)

range:

(

0

,

∞

)

x intercept: none

y-intercept:

(

0

,

A

0

)

increasing if

k

\>

0

(see

)

decreasing if

k

\<

0

(see

)

<figure id="CNX_Precalc_Figure_04_07_004">

</figure>
::::

::: {#Example_04_07_01 .example}
A population of bacteria doubles every hour. If the culture started with
10 bacteria, graph the population as a function of time.

When an amount grows at a fixed percent per unit time, the growth is
exponential. To find A0 we use the fact that A0 is the amount at time
zero, so A0=10. To find k, use the fact that after one hour (t=1) the
population doubles from 10 to 20. The formula is derived as follows

$$\begin{array}{ll}
{20 = 10e^{k \cdot 1}} & \\
{2 = e^{k}} & \text{Divide~by~10} \\
{\ln 2 = k} & \text{Take~the~natural~logarithm}
\end{array}$$

so k=ln(2). Thus the equation we want to graph is y=10 e (ln2)t =10 ( e
ln2 ) t =10· 2 t . The graph is shown in [\#](#).

<figure id="CNX_Precalc_Figure_04_07_005">

</figure>

The population of bacteria after ten hours is 10,240. We could describe
this amount is being of the order of magnitude 104. The population of
bacteria after twenty hours is 10,485,760 which is of the order of
magnitude 107, so we could say that the population has increased by
three orders of magnitude in ten hours.
:::

## Half-Life {#fs-id1165137803583}

We now turn to exponential decay. One of the common terms associated
with exponential decay, as stated above, is *half-life*, the length of
time it takes an exponentially decaying quantity to decrease to half its
original amount. Every radioactive isotope has a half-life, and the
process describing the exponential decay of an isotope is called
radioactive decay.

To find the half-life of a function describing exponential decay, solve
the following equation:

$$\frac{1}{2}A_{0} = A_{o}e^{kt}$$

We find that the half-life depends only on the constant k and not on the
starting quantity A0.

The formula is derived as follows

$$\begin{array}{ll}
{\frac{1}{2}A_{0} = A_{o}e^{kt}} & \\
{\frac{1}{2} = e^{kt}} & {\text{Divide by}A_{0}.} \\
{\ln\left( \frac{1}{2} \right) = kt} & {\text{Take the natural log}.} \\
{- \ln(2) = kt} & {\text{Apply laws of logarithms}.} \\
{- \frac{\ln(2)}{k} = t} & {\text{Divide by}k.}
\end{array}$$

Since t, the time, is positive, k must, as expected, be negative. This
gives us the half-life formula

$$t = - \frac{\ln(2)}{k}$$

:::: {#fs-id1165137418076 .note}
::: title
:::

How To

*Given the half-life, find the decay rate.*

Write

A

=

A

o

e

k

t

.

Replace

A

by

1

2

A

0

and replace

t

by the given half-life.

Solve to find

k

.

Express

k

as an exact value (do not round).

Note: *It is also possible to find the decay rate using* k=−ln(2)t.
::::

::: {#Example_04_07_02 .example}
The half-life of carbon-14 is 5,730 years. Express the amount of
carbon-14 remaining as a function of time, t.

This formula is derived as follows. $$\begin{array}{ll}
{A = A_{0}e^{kt}} & {\text{The continuous growth formula}.} \\
{0.5A_{0} = A_{0}e^{k \cdot 5730}} & {\text{Substitute the half-life for}t\mspace{9mu}\text{and}0.5A_{0}\mspace{9mu}\text{for}f(t).} \\
{0.5 = e^{5730k}} & {\text{Divide by}A_{0}.} \\
{\ln(0.5) = 5730k} & {\text{Take the natural log of both sides}.} \\
{k = \frac{\ln(0.5)}{5730}} & {\text{Divide by the coefficient of}k.} \\
{A = A_{0}e^{{(\frac{\ln(0.5)}{5730})}t}} & {\text{Substitute for}r\mspace{9mu}\text{in the continuous growth formula}.}
\end{array}$$

The function that describes this continuous decay is
f(t)=A0e(ln(0.5)5730)t. We observe that the coefficient of t,
ln(0.5)5730≈−1.2097×10−4 is negative, as expected in the case of
exponential decay.
:::

:::: {#fs-id1165137639710 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

The half-life of plutonium-244 is 80,000,000 years. Find a function that
gives the amount of plutonium-244 remaining as a function of time,
measured in years.

f(t)=A0e−0.0000000087t
::::

## Radiocarbon Dating {#fs-id1165137828123}

The formula for radioactive decay is important in radiocarbon dating,
which is used to calculate the approximate date a plant or animal died.
Radiocarbon dating was discovered in 1949 by Willard Libby, who won a
Nobel Prize for his discovery. It compares the difference between the
ratio of two isotopes of carbon in an organic artifact or fossil to the
ratio of those two isotopes in the air. It is believed to be accurate to
within about 1% error for plants or animals that died within the last
60,000 years.

Carbon-14 is a radioactive isotope of carbon that has a half-life of
5,730 years. It occurs in small quantities in the carbon dioxide in the
air we breathe. Most of the carbon on Earth is carbon-12, which has an
atomic weight of 12 and is not radioactive. Scientists have determined
the ratio of carbon-14 to carbon-12 in the air for the last 60,000
years, using tree rings and other organic samples of known
dates---although the ratio has changed slightly over the centuries.

As long as a plant or animal is alive, the ratio of the two isotopes of
carbon in its body is close to the ratio in the atmosphere. When it
dies, the carbon-14 in its body decays and is not replaced. By comparing
the ratio of carbon-14 to carbon-12 in a decaying sample to the known
ratio in the atmosphere, the date the plant or animal died can be
approximated.

Since the half-life of carbon-14 is 5,730 years, the formula for the
amount of carbon-14 remaining after t years is

$$A \approx A_{0}e^{{(\frac{\ln(0.5)}{5730})}t}$$

where

A is the amount of carbon-14 remaining A0 is the amount of carbon-14
when the plant or animal began decaying.

This formula is derived as follows:

$$\begin{array}{ll}
{A = A_{0}e^{kt}} & {\text{The continuous growth formula}.} \\
{0.5A_{0} = A_{0}e^{k \cdot 5730}} & {\text{Substitute the half-life for}\mspace{7mu} t\mspace{7mu}\text{and}\mspace{7mu} 0.5A_{0}\mspace{7mu}\text{for}\mspace{7mu} f(t).} \\
{0.5 = e^{5730k}} & {\text{Divide by}\mspace{7mu} A_{0}.} \\
{\ln(0.5) = 5730k} & {\text{Take the natural log of both sides}.} \\
{k = \frac{\ln(0.5)}{5730}} & {\text{Divide by the coefficient of}\mspace{7mu} k.} \\
{A = A_{0}e^{{(\frac{\ln(0.5)}{5730})}t}} & {\text{Substitute for}\mspace{7mu} k\mspace{7mu}\text{in the continuous growth formula}.}
\end{array}$$

To find the age of an object, we solve this equation for t:

$$t = \frac{\ln\left( \frac{A}{A_{0}} \right)}{- 0.000121}$$

Out of necessity, we neglect here the many details that a scientist
takes into consideration when doing carbon-14 dating, and we only look
at the basic formula. The ratio of carbon-14 to carbon-12 in the
atmosphere is approximately 0.0000000001%. Let r be the ratio of
carbon-14 to carbon-12 in the organic artifact or fossil to be dated,
determined by a method called liquid scintillation. From the equation
A≈A0e−0.000121t we know the ratio of the percentage of carbon-14 in the
object we are dating to the initial amount of carbon-14 in the object
when it was formed is r=AA0≈e−0.000121t. We solve this equation for t,
to get

$$t = \frac{\ln(r)}{- 0.000121}$$

:::: {#fs-id1165137807119 .note}
::: title
:::

How To

*Given the percentage of carbon-14 in an object, determine its age.*

Express the given percentage of carbon-14 as an equivalent decimal,

k

.

Substitute for

k

in the equation

t

=

ln

(

r

)

−

0.000121

and solve for the age,

t

.
::::

::: {#Example_04_07_03 .example}
A bone fragment is found that contains 20% of its original carbon-14. To
the nearest year, how old is the bone?

We substitute 20%=0.20 for r in the equation and solve for t:

$$\begin{array}{ll}
{t = \frac{\ln(r)}{- 0.000121}} & {\text{Use~the~general~form~of~the~equation}.} \\
{= \frac{\ln(0.20)}{- 0.000121}\begin{array}{llll}
 & & & 
\end{array}} & {\text{Substitute~for~}r.} \\
{\approx 13301} & {\text{Round~to~the~nearest~year}.}
\end{array}$$

The bone fragment is about 13,301 years old.

The instruments that measure the percentage of carbon-14 are extremely
sensitive and, as we mention above, a scientist will need to do much
more work than we did in order to be satisfied. Even so, carbon dating
is only accurate to about 1%, so this age should be given as
13,301 years±1% or 13,301 years±133 years.
:::

:::: {#fs-id1165137653205 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Cesium-137 has a half-life of about 30 years. If we begin with 200 mg of
cesium-137, will it take more or less than 230 years until only 1
milligram remains?

less than 230 years, 229.3157 to be exact
::::

## Calculating Doubling Time {#fs-id1165134040514}

For decaying quantities, we determined how long it took for half of a
substance to decay. For growing quantities, we might want to find out
how long it takes for a quantity to double. As we mentioned above, the
time it takes for a quantity to double is called the doubling time.

Given the basic exponential growth equation A= A 0 e kt , doubling time
can be found by solving for when the original quantity has doubled, that
is, by solving 2 A 0 = A 0 e kt .

The formula is derived as follows:

$$\begin{array}{ll}
{2A_{0} = A_{0}e^{kt}} & \\
{2 = e^{kt}} & {\text{Divide by}A_{0}.} \\
{\ln 2 = kt} & {\text{Take the natural logarithm}.} \\
{t = \frac{\ln 2}{k}} & {\text{Divide by the coefficient of}t.}
\end{array}$$

Thus the doubling time is

$$t = \frac{\ln 2}{k}$$

::: {#Example_04_07_04 .example}
According to Moore's Law, the doubling time for the number of
transistors that can be put on a computer chip is approximately two
years. Give a function that describes this behavior.

The formula is derived as follows:

$$\begin{array}{ll}
{t = \frac{\ln 2}{k}} & {\text{The doubling time formula}.} \\
{2 = \frac{\ln 2}{k}} & {\text{Use a doubling time of two years}.} \\
{k = \frac{\ln 2}{2}} & {\text{Multiply by}\mspace{7mu} k\mspace{7mu}\text{and divide by 2}.} \\
{A\mspace{9mu} = A_{0}e^{\frac{\ln 2}{2}t}\begin{array}{llll}
 & & & 
\end{array}} & {\text{Substitute}\mspace{7mu} k\mspace{7mu}\text{into the continuous growth formula}.}
\end{array}$$

The function is A 0 e ln2 2 t .
:::

:::: {#fs-id1165135190645 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Recent data suggests that, as of 2013, the rate of growth predicted by
Moore's Law no longer holds. Growth has slowed to a doubling time of
approximately three years. Find the new function that takes that longer
doubling time into account.

f(t)= A 0 e ln2 3 t
::::

# Using Newton's Law of Cooling {#fs-id1165137854981}

Exponential decay can also be applied to temperature. When a hot object
is left in surrounding air that is at a lower temperature, the object's
temperature will decrease exponentially, leveling off as it approaches
the surrounding air temperature. On a graph of the temperature function,
the leveling off will correspond to a horizontal asymptote at the
temperature of the surrounding air. Unless the room temperature is zero,
this will correspond to a vertical shift of the generic exponential
decay function. This translation leads to Newton's Law of Cooling, the
scientific formula for temperature as a function of time as an object's
temperature is equalized with the ambient temperature

$$T(t) = Ae^{kt} + T_{s}$$

This formula is derived as follows:

$$\begin{array}{ll}
{T(t) = Ab^{ct} + T_{s}} & \\
{T(t) = Ae^{\ln(b^{ct})} + T_{s}\begin{array}{llll}
 & & & 
\end{array}} & {\text{Laws~of~logarithms}.} \\
{T(t) = Ae^{ct\ln b} + T_{s}} & {\text{Laws~of~logarithms}.} \\
{T(t) = Ae^{kt} + T_{s}} & {\text{Rename~the~constant~}c~\ln~b,\mspace{9mu}\text{calling~it~}k.}
\end{array}$$

:::: {#fs-id1165135629984 .note}
::: title
Newton's Law of Cooling
:::

The temperature of an object, T, in surrounding air with temperature T s
will behave according to the formula $$T(t) = Ae^{kt} + T_{s}$$ where t
is time A is the difference between the initial temperature of the
object and the surroundings k is a constant, the continuous rate of
cooling of the object
::::

:::: {#fs-id1165137667467 .note}
::: title
:::

How To

*Given a set of conditions, apply Newton's Law of Cooling.*

Set

T

s

equal to the

y

-coordinate of the horizontal asymptote (usually the ambient
temperature).

Substitute the given values into the continuous growth formula

T

(

t

)

=

A

e

k

t

\+

T

s

to find the parameters

A

and

k

.

Substitute in the desired time to find the temperature or the desired
temperature to find the time.
::::

::: {#Example_04_07_05 .example}
A cheesecake is taken out of the oven with an ideal internal temperature
of 165°F, and is placed into a 35°F refrigerator. After 10 minutes, the
cheesecake has cooled to 150°F. If we must wait until the cheesecake has
cooled to 70°F before we eat it, how long will we have to wait?

Because the surrounding air temperature in the refrigerator is 35
degrees, the cheesecake's temperature will decay exponentially toward
35, following the equation

$$T(t) = Ae^{kt} + 35$$

We know the initial temperature was 165, so T(0)=165.

$$\begin{array}{ll}
{165 = Ae^{k0} + 35} & {\text{Substitute~}(0,165).} \\
{\mspace{9mu}\mspace{9mu}\mspace{9mu}\mspace{9mu}\mspace{9mu} A = 130} & {\text{Solve~for~}A.}
\end{array}$$

We were given another data point, T(10)=150, which we can use to solve
for k.

$$\begin{array}{ll}
{150 = 130e^{k10} + 35} & {\text{Substitute (10, 150)}.} \\
{115 = 130e^{k10}} & {\text{Subtract 35}.} \\
{\frac{115}{130} = e^{10k}} & {\text{Divide by 130}.} \\
{\ln\left( \frac{115}{130} \right) = 10k} & {\text{Take the natural log of both sides}.} \\
{k = \frac{\ln\left( \frac{115}{130} \right)}{10} \approx - 0.0123} & {\text{Divide by the coefficient of}k.}
\end{array}$$

This gives us the equation for the cooling of the cheesecake: T(t)=130 e
--0.0123t +35.

Now we can solve for the time it will take for the temperature to cool
to 70 degrees.

$$\begin{array}{ll}
{70 = 130e^{- 0.0123t} + 35} & {\text{Substitute in 70 for}T(t).} \\
{35 = 130e^{- 0.0123t}} & {\text{Subtract 35}.} \\
{\frac{35}{130} = e^{- 0.0123t}} & {\text{Divide by 130}.} \\
{\ln(\frac{35}{130}) = - 0.0123t} & \text{Take the natural log of both sides} \\
{t = \frac{\ln(\frac{35}{130})}{- 0.0123} \approx 106.68} & {\text{Divide by the coefficient of}t.}
\end{array}$$

It will take about 107 minutes, or one hour and 47 minutes, for the
cheesecake to cool to 70°F.
:::

:::: {#fs-id1165135305911 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

A pitcher of water at 40 degrees Fahrenheit is placed into a 70 degree
room. One hour later, the temperature has risen to 45 degrees. How long
will it take for the temperature to rise to 60 degrees?

6.026 hours
::::

# Using Logistic Growth Models {#fs-id1165137737677}

Exponential growth cannot continue forever. Exponential models, while
they may be useful in the short term, tend to fall apart the longer they
continue. Consider an aspiring writer who writes a single line on day
one and plans to double the number of lines she writes each day for a
month. By the end of the month, she must write over 17 billion lines, or
one-half-billion pages. It is impractical, if not impossible, for anyone
to write that much in such a short period of time. Eventually, an
exponential model must begin to approach some limiting value, and then
the growth is forced to slow. For this reason, it is often better to use
a model with an upper bound instead of an exponential growth model,
though the exponential growth model is still useful over a short term,
before approaching the limiting value.

The logistic growth model is approximately exponential at first, but it
has a reduced rate of growth as the output approaches the model's upper
bound, called the carrying capacity. For constants a, b, and c, the
logistic growth of a population over time t is represented by the model

$$f(t) = \frac{c}{1 + ae^{- bt}}$$

The graph in [\#](#) shows how the growth rate changes over time. The
graph increases from left to right, but the growth rate only increases
until it reaches its point of maximum growth rate, at which point the
rate of increase decreases.

<figure id="CNX_Precalc_Figure_04_07_006">

</figure>

:::: {#fs-id1165135207602 .note}
::: title
Logistic Growth
:::

The logistic growth model is

$$f(t) = \frac{c}{1 + ae^{- bt}}$$

where

c 1+a is the initial value c is the *carrying capacity*, or *limiting
value* b is a constant determined by the rate of growth.
::::

::: {#Example_04_07_06 .example}
An influenza epidemic spreads through a population rapidly, at a rate
that depends on two factors: The more people who have the flu, the more
rapidly it spreads, and also the more uninfected people there are, the
more rapidly it spreads. These two factors make the logistic model a
good one to study the spread of communicable diseases. And, clearly,
there is a maximum value for the number of people infected: the entire
population.

For example, at time t=0 there is one person in a community of 1,000
people who has the flu. So, in that community, at most 1,000 people can
have the flu. Researchers find that for this particular strain of the
flu, the logistic growth constant is b=0.6030. Estimate the number of
people in this community who will have had this flu after ten days.
Predict how many people in this community will have had this flu after a
long period of time has passed.

We substitute the given data into the logistic growth model

$$f(t) = \frac{c}{1 + ae^{- bt}}$$

Because at most 1,000 people, the entire population of the community,
can get the flu, we know the limiting value is c=1000. To find a, we use
the formula that the number of cases at time t=0 is c 1+a =1, from which
it follows that a=999. This model predicts that, after ten days, the
number of people who have had the flu is f(t)= 1000 1+999 e −0.6030x
≈293.8. Because the actual number must be a whole number (a person has
either had the flu or not) we round to 294. In the long term, the number
of people who will contract the flu is the limiting value, c=1000.

Remember that, because we are dealing with a virus, we cannot predict
with certainty the number of people infected. The model only
approximates the number of people infected and will not give us exact or
actual values.

The graph in [\#](#) gives a good picture of how this model fits the
data.

<figure id="CNX_Precalc_Figure_04_07_007">

</figure>
:::

:::: {#fs-id1165135262651 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Using the model in [\#](#), estimate the number of cases of flu on day
15.

895 cases on day 15
::::

# Choosing an Appropriate Model for Data {#fs-id1165135511570}

Now that we have discussed various mathematical models, we need to learn
how to choose the appropriate model for the raw data we have. Many
factors influence the choice of a mathematical model, among which are
experience, scientific laws, and patterns in the data itself. Not all
data can be described by elementary functions. Sometimes, a function is
chosen that approximates the data over a given interval. For instance,
suppose data were gathered on the number of homes bought in the United
States from the years 1960 to 2013. After plotting these data in a
scatter plot, we notice that the shape of the data from the years 2000
to 2013 follow a logarithmic curve. We could restrict the interval from
2000 to 2010, apply regression analysis using a logarithmic model, and
use it to predict the number of home buyers for the year 2015.

Three kinds of functions that are often useful in mathematical models
are linear functions, exponential functions, and logarithmic functions.
If the data lies on a straight line, or seems to lie approximately along
a straight line, a linear model may be best. If the data is non-linear,
we often consider an exponential or logarithmic model, though other
models, such as quadratic models, may also be considered.

In choosing between an exponential model and a logarithmic model, we
look at the way the data curves. This is called the concavity. If we
draw a line between two data points, and all (or most) of the data
between those two points lies above that line, we say the curve is
concave down. We can think of it as a bowl that bends downward and
therefore cannot hold water. If all (or most) of the data between those
two points lies below the line, we say the curve is concave up. In this
case, we can think of a bowl that bends upward and can therefore hold
water. An exponential curve, whether rising or falling, whether
representing growth or decay, is always concave up away from its
horizontal asymptote. A logarithmic curve is always concave away from
its vertical asymptote. In the case of positive data, which is the most
common case, an exponential curve is always concave up, and a
logarithmic curve always concave down.

A logistic curve changes concavity. It starts out concave up and then
changes to concave down beyond a certain point, called a point of
inflection.

After using the graph to help us choose a type of function to use as a
model, we substitute points, and solve to find the parameters. We reduce
round-off error by choosing points as far apart as possible.

::: {#Example_04_07_07 .example}
Does a linear, exponential, logarithmic, or logistic model best fit the
values listed in [\#](#)? Find the model, and use a graph to check your
choice.

  ------- --- ------- ------- ------- ------- ------- ------- ------- -------
  *x*     1   2       3       4       5       6       7       8       9
  *y*     0   1.386   2.197   2.773   3.219   3.584   3.892   4.159   4.394
  ------- --- ------- ------- ------- ------- ------- ------- ------- -------

First, plot the data on a graph as in [\#](#). For the purpose of
graphing, round the data to two decimal places.

<figure id="CNX_Precalc_Figure_04_07_008">

</figure>

Clearly, the points do not lie on a straight line, so we reject a linear
model. If we draw a line between any two of the points, most or all of
the points between those two points lie above the line, so the graph is
concave down, suggesting a logarithmic model. We can try y=aln(bx).
Plugging in the first point, ( 1,0 ), gives 0=alnb. We reject the case
that a=0 (if it were, all outputs would be 0), so we know ln(b)=0. Thus
b=1 and y=aln( x ). Next we can use the point ( 9,4.394 ) to solve for
a:

$$\begin{array}{l}
{y = a\ln(x)} \\
{4.394 = a\ln(9)} \\
{a = \frac{4.394}{\ln(9)}}
\end{array}$$

Because a= 4.394 ln( 9 ) ≈2, an appropriate model for the data is y=2ln(
x ).

To check the accuracy of the model, we graph the function together with
the given points as in [\#](#).

<figure id="CNX_Precalc_Figure_04_07_009">

</figure>

We can conclude that the model is a good fit to the data.

Compare [\#](#) to the graph of y=ln( x 2 ) shown in [\#](#).

<figure id="CNX_Precalc_Figure_04_07_009a">

</figure>

The graphs appear to be identical when x\>0. A quick check confirms this
conclusion: y=ln( x 2 )=2ln( x ) for x\>0.

However, if x\<0, the graph of y=ln( x 2 ) includes a "extra" branch, as
shown in [\#](#). This occurs because, while y=2ln( x ) cannot have
negative values in the domain (as such values would force the argument
to be negative), the function y=ln( x 2 ) can have negative domain
values.

<figure id="CNX_Precalc_Figure_04_07_010">

</figure>
:::

:::: {#fs-id1165134054938 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Does a linear, exponential, or logarithmic model best fit the data in
[\#](#)? Find the model.

  ------- ------- ------- ------- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------- ---------
  *x*     1       2       3       4        5        6        7        8         9
  *y*     3.297   5.437   8.963   14.778   24.365   40.172   66.231   109.196   180.034
  ------- ------- ------- ------- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------- ---------

Exponential. y=2 e 0.5x .
::::

# Expressing an Exponential Model in Base e {#fs-id1165137749158}

While powers and logarithms of any base can be used in modeling, the two
most common bases are 10 and e. In science and mathematics, the base e
is often preferred. We can use laws of exponents and laws of logarithms
to change any base to base e.

:::: {#fs-id1165134342616 .note}
::: title
:::

How To

*Given a model with the form y=a b x , change it to the form y= A 0 e kx
.*

Rewrite

y

=

a

b

x

as

y

=

a

e

ln

(

b

x

)

.

Use the power rule of logarithms to rewrite y as

y

=

a

e

x

ln

(

b

)

=

a

e

ln

(

b

)

x

.

Note that

a

=

A

0

and

k

=

ln

(

b

)

in the equation

y

=

A

0

e

k

x

.
::::

::: {#Example_04_07_08 .example}
Change the function y=2.5 (3.1) x so that this same function is written
in the form y= A 0 e kx .

The formula is derived as follows

$$\begin{array}{ll}
{y = 2.5{(3.1)}^{x}} & \\
{\mspace{9mu} = 2.5e^{\ln{(3.1^{x})}}} & {\text{Insert~exponential~and~its~inverse}\text{.}} \\
{\mspace{9mu} = 2.5e^{x\ln 3.1}} & {\text{Laws~of~logs}\text{.}} \\
{\mspace{9mu} = 2.5e^{({\ln 3.1})}{}^{x}} & \text{Commutative~law~of~multiplication}
\end{array}$$
:::

:::: {#fs-id1165135664951 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Change the function y=3 (0.5) x to one having e as the base.

y=3 e ( ln0.5 )x
::::

:::: {#fs-id1165135171587 .note}
::: title
:::

Media

Access these online resources for additional instruction and practice
with exponential and logarithmic models.

Logarithm Application -- pH

Exponential Model -- Age Using Half-Life

Newton's Law of Cooling

Exponential Growth Given Doubling Time

Exponential Growth -- Find Initial Amount Given Doubling Time
::::

# Key Equations {#fs-id1165135208780}

  ------------------------- --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Half-life formula         If A= A 0 e kt , k\<0, the half-life is t=− ln(2) k .
  Carbon-14 dating          t= ln( A A 0 ) −0.000121 . A 0 is the amount of carbon-14 when the plant or animal died A is the amount of carbon-14 remaining today t is the age of the fossil in years
  Doubling time formula     If A= A 0 e kt , k\>0, the doubling time is t= ln2 k
  Newton's Law of Cooling   T(t)=A e kt + T s , where T s is the ambient temperature, A=T(0)− T s , and k is the continuous rate of cooling.
  ------------------------- --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Key Concepts {#fs-id1165137894245}

The basic exponential function is

f

(

x

)

=

a

b

x

.

If

b

\>

1

,

we have exponential growth; if

0

\<

b

\<

1

,

we have exponential decay.

We can also write this formula in terms of continuous growth as

A

=

A

0

e

k

x

,

where

A

0

is the starting value. If

A

0

is positive, then we have exponential growth when

k

\>

0

and exponential decay when

k

\<

0\.

See

.

In general, we solve problems involving exponential growth or decay in
two steps. First, we set up a model and use the model to find the
parameters. Then we use the formula with these parameters to predict
growth and decay. See

.

We can find the age,

t

,

of an organic artifact by measuring the amount,

k

,

of carbon-14 remaining in the artifact and using the formula

t

=

ln

(

k

)

−

0.000121

to solve for

t

.

See

.

Given a substance's doubling time or half-time, we can find a function
that represents its exponential growth or decay. See

.

We can use Newton's Law of Cooling to find how long it will take for a
cooling object to reach a desired temperature, or to find what
temperature an object will be after a given time. See

.

We can use logistic growth functions to model real-world situations
where the rate of growth changes over time, such as population growth,
spread of disease, and spread of rumors. See

.

We can use real-world data gathered over time to observe trends.
Knowledge of linear, exponential, logarithmic, and logistic graphs help
us to develop models that best fit our data. See

.

Any exponential function with the form

y

=

a

b

x

can be rewritten as an equivalent exponential function with the form

y

=

A

0

e

k

x

where

k

=

ln

b

.

See

.

# Section Exercises {#fs-id1165134047572}

## Verbal {#fs-id1165134047576}

With what kind of exponential model would *half-life* be associated?
What role does half-life play in these models?

Half-life is a measure of decay and is thus associated with exponential
decay models. The half-life of a substance or quantity is the amount of
time it takes for half of the initial amount of that substance or
quantity to decay.

What is carbon dating? Why does it work? Give an example in which carbon
dating would be useful.

With what kind of exponential model would *doubling time* be associated?
What role does doubling time play in these models?

Doubling time is a measure of growth and is thus associated with
exponential growth models. The doubling time of a substance or quantity
is the amount of time it takes for the initial amount of that substance
or quantity to double in size.

Define Newton's Law of Cooling. Then name at least three real-world
situations where Newton's Law of Cooling would be applied.

What is an order of magnitude? Why are orders of magnitude useful? Give
an example to explain.

An order of magnitude is the nearest power of ten by which a quantity
exponentially grows. It is also an approximate position on a logarithmic
scale; Sample response: Orders of magnitude are useful when making
comparisons between numbers that differ by a great amount. For example,
the mass of Saturn is 95 times greater than the mass of Earth. This is
the same as saying that the mass of Saturn is about 10 2 times, or *2
orders of magnitude* greater, than the mass of Earth.

## Numeric {#fs-id1165135448286}

The temperature of an object in degrees Fahrenheit after *t* minutes is
represented by the equation T(t)=68 e −0.0174t +72. To the nearest
degree, what is the temperature of the object after one and a half
hours?

For the following exercises, use the logistic growth model f(x)= 150 1+8
e −2x .

Find and interpret f(0). Round to the nearest tenth.

f(0)≈16.7; The amount initially present is about 16.7 units.

Find and interpret f(4). Round to the nearest tenth.

Find the carrying capacity.

150

Graph the model.

Determine whether the data from the table could best be represented as a
function that is linear, exponential, or logarithmic. Then write a
formula for a model that represents the data.

  ------- ----------
  *x*     *f(x)*
  --2     0.694
  --1     0.833
  0       1
  1       1.2
  2       1.44
  3       1.728
  4       2.074
  5       2.488
  ------- ----------

exponential; f(x)= 1.2 x

Rewrite f(x)=1.68 ( 0.65 ) x as an exponential equation with base e to
five decimal places.

## Technology {#fs-id1165135154332}

For the following exercises, enter the data from each table into a
graphing calculator and graph the resulting scatter plots. Determine
whether the data from the table could represent a function that is
linear, exponential, or logarithmic.

  ------- ----------
  *x*     *f(x)*
  1       2
  2       4.079
  3       5.296
  4       6.159
  5       6.828
  6       7.375
  7       7.838
  8       8.238
  9       8.592
  10      8.908
  ------- ----------

logarithmic

  ------- ----------
  *x*     *f(x)*
  1       2.4
  2       2.88
  3       3.456
  4       4.147
  5       4.977
  6       5.972
  7       7.166
  8       8.6
  9       10.32
  10      12.383
  ------- ----------

  ------- ----------
  *x*     *f(x)*
  4       9.429
  5       9.972
  6       10.415
  7       10.79
  8       11.115
  9       11.401
  10      11.657
  11      11.889
  12      12.101
  13      12.295
  ------- ----------

logarithmic

  ------- ----------
  *x*     *f(x)*
  1.25    5.75
  2.25    8.75
  3.56    12.68
  4.2     14.6
  5.65    18.95
  6.75    22.25
  7.25    23.75
  8.6     27.8
  9.25    29.75
  10.5    33.5
  ------- ----------

For the following exercises, use a graphing calculator and this
scenario: the population of a fish farm in t years is modeled by the
equation P( t )= 1000 1+9 e −0.6t .

Graph the function.

What is the initial population of fish?

To the nearest tenth, what is the doubling time for the fish population?

about 1.4 years

To the nearest whole number, what will the fish population be after 2
years?

To the nearest tenth, how long will it take for the population to reach
900?

about 7.3 years

What is the carrying capacity for the fish population? Justify your
answer using the graph of P.

## Extensions {#fs-id1165135404218}

A substance has a half-life of 2.045 minutes. If the initial amount of
the substance was 132.8 grams, how many half-lives will have passed
before the substance decays to 8.3 grams? What is the total time of
decay?

4 half-lives; 8.18 minutes

The formula for an increasing population is given by P(t)= P 0 e rt
where P 0 is the initial population and r\>0. Derive a general formula
for the time *t* it takes for the population to increase by a factor of
*M*.

Recall the formula for calculating the magnitude of an earthquake, M= 2
3 log( S S 0 ). Show each step for solving this equation algebraically
for the seismic moment S.

M= 2 3 log( S S 0 ) log( S S 0 )= 3 2 M S S 0 = 10 3M 2 S= S 0 10 3M 2

What is the *y*-intercept of the logistic growth model y= c 1+a e −rx ?
Show the steps for calculation. What does this point tell us about the
population?

Prove that b x = e xln( b ) for positive b≠1.

Let y= b x for some non-negative real number b such that b≠1. Then,

ln(y)=ln( b x ) ln(y)=xln(b) e ln(y) = e xln(b)       y= e xln(b)

## Real-World Applications {#fs-id1165135456884}

For the following exercises, use this scenario: A doctor prescribes 125
milligrams of a therapeutic drug that decays by about 30% each hour.

To the nearest hour, what is the half-life of the drug?

Write an exponential model representing the amount of the drug remaining
in the patient's system after t hours. Then use the formula to find the
amount of the drug that would remain in the patient's system after 3
hours. Round to the nearest milligram.

A=125 e ( −0.3567t ) ;A≈43 mg

Using the model found in the previous exercise, find f( 10 ) and
interpret the result. Round to the nearest hundredth.

For the following exercises, use this scenario: A tumor is injected with
0.5 grams of Iodine-125, which has a decay rate of 1.15% per day.

To the nearest day, how long will it take for half of the Iodine-125 to
decay?

about 60 days

Write an exponential model representing the amount of Iodine-125
remaining in the tumor after t days. Then use the formula to find the
amount of Iodine-125 that would remain in the tumor after 60 days. Round
to the nearest tenth of a gram.

A scientist begins with 250 grams of a radioactive substance. After 250
minutes, the sample has decayed to 32 grams. Rounding to five decimal
places, write an exponential equation representing this situation. To
the nearest minute, what is the half-life of this substance?

A(t)=250 e (−0.00822t) ; half-life: about 84 minutes

The half-life of Radium-226 is 1590 years. What is the annual decay
rate? Express the decimal result to four decimal places and the
percentage to two decimal places.

The half-life of Erbium-165 is 10.4 hours. What is the hourly decay
rate? Express the decimal result to four decimal places and the
percentage to two decimal places.

r≈−0.0667, So the hourly decay rate is about 6.67%

A wooden artifact from an archeological dig contains 60 percent of the
carbon-14 that is present in living trees. To the nearest year, about
how many years old is the artifact? (The half-life of carbon-14 is 5730
years.)

A research student is working with a culture of bacteria that doubles in
size every twenty minutes. The initial population count was 1350
bacteria. Rounding to five decimal places, write an exponential equation
representing this situation. To the nearest whole number, what is the
population size after 3 hours?

f(t)=1350 e (0.03466t) ; after 3 hours: P(180)≈691,200

For the following exercises, use this scenario: A biologist recorded a
count of 360 bacteria present in a culture after 5 minutes and 1000
bacteria present after 20 minutes.

To the nearest whole number, what was the initial population in the
culture?

Rounding to six decimal places, write an exponential equation
representing this situation. To the nearest minute, how long did it take
the population to double?

f(t)=256 e (0.068110t) ; doubling time: about 10 minutes

For the following exercises, use this scenario: A pot of warm soup with
an internal temperature of 100° Fahrenheit was taken off the stove to
cool in a 69° F room. After fifteen minutes, the internal temperature of
the soup was 95° F.

Use Newton's Law of Cooling to write a formula that models this
situation.

To the nearest minute, how long will it take the soup to cool to 80° F?

about 88 minutes

To the nearest degree, what will the temperature be after 2 and a half
hours?

For the following exercises, use this scenario: A turkey is taken out of
the oven with an internal temperature of 165°F and is allowed to cool in
a 75°F room. After half an hour, the internal temperature of the turkey
is 145°F.

Write a formula that models this situation.

T(t)=90 e (−0.008377t) +75, where t is in minutes.

To the nearest degree, what will the temperature be after 50 minutes?

To the nearest minute, how long will it take the turkey to cool to
110° F?

about 113 minutes

For the following exercises, find the value of the number shown on each
logarithmic scale. Round all answers to the nearest thousandth.

log( x )=1.5;x≈31.623

Plot each set of approximate values of intensity of sounds on a
logarithmic scale: Whisper: 10 −10   W m 2 , Vacuum: 10 −4 W m 2 , Jet:
10 2   W m 2

Recall the formula for calculating the magnitude of an earthquake, M= 2
3 log( S S 0 ). One earthquake has magnitude 3.9 on the MMS scale. If a
second earthquake has 750 times as much energy as the first, find the
magnitude of the second quake. Round to the nearest hundredth.

MMS magnitude: 5.82

For the following exercises, use this scenario: The equation N( t )= 500
1+49 e −0.7t models the number of people in a town who have heard a
rumor after *t* days.

How many people started the rumor?

To the nearest whole number, how many people will have heard the rumor
after 3 days?

N(3)≈71

As t increases without bound, what value does N( t ) approach? Interpret
your answer.

For the following exercise, choose the correct answer choice.

A doctor injects a patient with 13 milligrams of radioactive dye that
decays exponentially. After 12 minutes, there are 4.75 milligrams of dye
remaining in the patient's system. Which is an appropriate model for
this situation?

ⓐ

f

(

t

)

=

13

(

0.0805

)

t

ⓑ

f

(

t

)

=

13

e

0.9195

t

ⓒ

f

(

t

)

=

13

e

(

−

0.0839

t

)

ⓓ

f

(

t

)

=

4.75

1

\+

13

e

−

0.83925

t

C

# 

carrying capacity

in a logistic model, the limiting value of the output

doubling time

the time it takes for a quantity to double

half-life

the length of time it takes for a substance to exponentially decay to
half of its original quantity

logistic growth model

a function of the form

f

(

x

)

=

c

1

\+

a

e

−

b

x

where

c

1

\+

a

is the initial value,

c

is the carrying capacity, or limiting value, and

b

is a constant determined by the rate of growth

Newton's Law of Cooling

the scientific formula for temperature as a function of time as an
object's temperature is equalized with the ambient temperature

order of magnitude

the power of ten, when a number is expressed in scientific notation,
with one non-zero digit to the left of the decimal
