m49368

> In this section, you will:
>
> Build an exponential model from data.
>
> Build a logarithmic model from data.
>
> Build a logistic model from data.

aa3a6479-56b9-4e74-9b72-5817cfe5bf5a

#  {#eip-290}

## Learning Objectives {#eip-417}

Draw and interpret scatter diagrams (linear, exponential, logarithmic).
(CA 4.3.1)

Fit a regression equation to a set of data and use the linear (or
exponential) model to make predictions. (CA 4.3.4)

## Objective 1: Draw and interpret scatter diagrams (linear, exponential, logarithmic). (CA 4.3.1) {#eip-744}

:::: {#eip-117 .note}
::: title
Vocabulary and Concept Check
:::

Draw and interpret scatter diagrams (linear, exponential, logarithmic).

Fill in the blanks and match the description with the graphs a, b, or c

A \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ function has equation fx=mx+b and has a basic shape
\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_. A \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ function has equation
fx=ax, a\>0, a≠1 and has a basic shape \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_. A
\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ function has equation fx=logax, a\>0, x\>0 and has a
basic shape \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_.
::::

A Scatter Plot is a graph of plotted points that may show a relationship
between the variables in a set of data.

::: {#Example_04_03_01 .example}
Draw and interpret scatter diagrams (linear, exponential, logarithmic).

The table below shows the number of cricket chirps in 15 seconds, for
several different air temperatures, in degrees Fahrenheit [^1] . Plot
this data, and determine whether the data appears to be linearly
related.

  --------------- ------ ------ ------ ---- ---- ---- ------ ------ ----
  *Chirps*        44     35     20.4   33   31   35   18.5   37     26
  *Temperature*   80.5   70.5   57     66   68   72   52     73.5   53
  --------------- ------ ------ ------ ---- ---- ---- ------ ------ ----

  : Cricket Chirps vs Air Temperature {#Table_04_03_01 .unnumbered}

Plotting this data, as depicted below, suggests that there may be a
trend. We can see from the trend in the data that the number of chirps
increases as the temperature increases. The trend appears to be roughly
linear, though certainly not perfectly so.

<figure id="Figure_04_03_002">

</figure>
:::

### Practice Makes Perfect {#eip-idm374381568}

Draw and interpret scatter diagrams ( linear, exponential, logarithmic).

Make a scatter plot for the table below. Does it look linear?
Exponential? Logarithmic?

  --- --- ----- ----- ----- ----- ----- ----- ----- -----
  x   1   2     3     4     5     6     7     8     9
  y   0   1.5   2.2   2.8   3.5   3.6   3.9   4.3   4.4
  --- --- ----- ----- ----- ----- ----- ----- ----- -----

Make a scatter plot for the table below. Does it look linear?
Exponential? Logarithmic?

  --- ----- ----- ----- ------ ------ ------ ------ ------- -------
  x   1     2     3     4      5      6      7      8       9
  y   3.3   5.6   9.1   15.1   24.4   40.2   66.2   108.4   180.1
  --- ----- ----- ----- ------ ------ ------ ------ ------- -------

Make a scatter plot for the table below. Does it look linear?
Exponential? Logarithmic?

  --- --- ----- --- ---- ------ ------
  x   1   2     3   4    5      6
  y   3   5.5   7   10   12.1   14.9
  --- --- ----- --- ---- ------ ------

## Objective 2: Fit a regression equation to a set of data and use the linear (or exponential) model to make predictions. (CA 4.3.4) {#eip-337}

We can find a linear function that fits the data in the previous problem
by "eyeballing" a line that seems to fit. But while estimating a line
works relatively well, technology can help us find a line that fits the
data as perfect as possible.

This line is called the Least Squares Regression Line or Linear
Regression Model.

A regression line is a line that is closest to the data in the scatter
plot, which means that such a line is a best fit for the data.

Fit a regression equation to a set of data and use the linear (or
exponential) model to make predictions.

:::: {#fs-id2627255 .note}
::: title
:::

How To

*Given data of input and corresponding outputs from a linear function,
find the best fit line using linear regression.*

Enter the input in List 1 (L1).

Enter the output in List 2 (L2).

On a graphing utility, select Linear Regression (LinReg).
::::

::: {#eip-70 .example}
Find the linear regression line using the cricket-chirp data in the
example earlier in this section, and find the temperature if there are
30 chirps in 15 seconds.

Enter the input (chirps) in List 1.

Enter the output (temperature) in List 2.

  ---- ------ ------ ------ ---- ---- ---- ------ ------ ----
  L1   44     35     20.4   33   31   35   18.5   37     26
  L2   80.5   70.5   57     66   68   72   52     73.5   53
  ---- ------ ------ ------ ---- ---- ---- ------ ------ ----

On a graphing utility, select Linear Regression (LinReg). Using the
cricket chirp data, with technology we obtain the equation:
T(c)=30.281+1.143c

To find the temperature for 30 chirps in 15 seconds we substitute 30 for
x and find T:

T

(

30

)

=

30

.

281

\+

1

.

143

(

30

)

=

64

.

571

≈

64

.

6

degrees

The graph of the scatter plot with the regression line of best fit is
shown.
:::

### Practice Makes Perfect {#eip-256}

Fit a regression equation to a set of data and use the linear (or
exponential) model to make predictions.

Gasoline consumption in the United States has been steadily increasing
from 1994 to 2004.

  ---------------------------------- ----- ----- ----- ----- ----- ----- ----- ----- ----- ----- -----
  Year                               94    95    96    97    98    99    00    01    02    03    04
  Consumption(billions of gallons)   113   116   118   119   123   125   126   128   131   133   136
  ---------------------------------- ----- ----- ----- ----- ----- ----- ----- ----- ----- ----- -----

ⓐ

Determine whether the trend is linear, and if so, use your graphing
utility to find a model for the data.

ⓑ

Use the model to predict the consumption in 2008.

We determined in the second practice problem, earlier in this section,
that the data below has an exponential trend. Use your graphing utility
to find an exponential model that fits the data the best and write your
exponential model below (Hint: instead of choosing Linear Regression,
choose Exponential Regression).

  --- ----- ----- ----- ------ ------ ------ ------ ------- -------
  x   1     2     3     4      5      6      7      8       9
  y   3.3   5.6   9.1   15.1   24.4   40.2   66.2   108.4   180.1
  --- ----- ----- ----- ------ ------ ------ ------ ------- -------

In previous sections of this chapter, we were either given a function
explicitly to graph or evaluate, or we were given a set of points that
were guaranteed to lie on the curve. Then we used algebra to find the
equation that fit the points exactly. In this section, we use a modeling
technique called *regression analysis* to find a curve that models data
collected from real-world observations. With regression analysis, we
don't expect all the points to lie perfectly on the curve. The idea is
to find a model that best fits the data. Then we use the model to make
predictions about future events.

Do not be confused by the word *model*. In mathematics, we often use the
terms *function*, *equation*, and *model* interchangeably, even though
they each have their own formal definition. The term *model* is
typically used to indicate that the equation or function approximates a
real-world situation.

We will concentrate on three types of regression models in this section:
exponential, logarithmic, and logistic. Having already worked with each
of these functions gives us an advantage. Knowing their formal
definitions, the behavior of their graphs, and some of their real-world
applications gives us the opportunity to deepen our understanding. As
each regression model is presented, key features and definitions of its
associated function are included for review. Take a moment to rethink
each of these functions, reflect on the work we've done so far, and then
explore the ways regression is used to model real-world phenomena.

# Building an Exponential Model from Data {#fs-id1527075}

As we've learned, there are a multitude of situations that can be
modeled by exponential functions, such as investment growth, radioactive
decay, atmospheric pressure changes, and temperatures of a cooling
object. What do these phenomena have in common? For one thing, all the
models either increase or decrease as time moves forward. But that's not
the whole story. It's the *way* data increase or decrease that helps us
determine whether it is best modeled by an exponential equation. Knowing
the behavior of exponential functions in general allows us to recognize
when to use exponential regression, so let's review exponential growth
and decay.

Recall that exponential functions have the form y=a b x or y= A 0 e kx .
When performing regression analysis, we use the form most commonly used
on graphing utilities, y=a b x . Take a moment to reflect on the
characteristics we've already learned about the exponential function y=a
b x (assume a\>0):

b

must be greater than zero and not equal to one.

The initial value of the model is

y

=

a

.

If

b

\>

1

,

the function models exponential growth. As

x

increases, the outputs of the model increase slowly at first, but then
increase more and more rapidly, without bound.

If

0

\<

b

\<

1

,

the function models

exponential decay

. As

x

increases, the outputs for the model decrease rapidly at first and then
level off to become asymptotic to the

x

-axis. In other words, the outputs never become equal to or less than
zero.

As part of the results, your calculator will display a number known as
the *correlation coefficient*, labeled by the variable r, or r 2 . (You
may have to change the calculator's settings for these to be shown.) The
values are an indication of the "goodness of fit" of the regression
equation to the data. We more commonly use the value of r 2 instead of
r, but the closer either value is to 1, the better the regression
equation approximates the data.

:::: {#fs-id1424609 .note}
::: title
Exponential Regression
:::

*Exponential regression* is used to model situations in which growth
begins slowly and then accelerates rapidly without bound, or where decay
begins rapidly and then slows down to get closer and closer to zero. We
use the command "*ExpReg*" on a graphing utility to fit an exponential
function to a set of data points. This returns an equation of the form,
y=a b x

Note that:

b

must be non-negative.

when

b

\>

1

,

we have an exponential growth model.

when

0

\<

b

\<

1

,

we have an exponential decay model.
::::

:::: {#fs-id1375157 .note}
::: title
:::

How To

*Given a set of data, perform exponential regression using a graphing
utility.*

Use the

STAT

then

EDIT

menu to enter given data.

Clear any existing data from the lists.

List the input values in the L1 column.

List the output values in the L2 column.

Graph and observe a scatter plot of the data using the

STATPLOT

feature.

Use

ZOOM

\[

9

\] to adjust axes to fit the data.

Verify the data follow an exponential pattern.

Find the equation that models the data.

Select "

ExpReg

" from the

STAT

then

CALC

menu.

Use the values returned for

a

and

b

to record the model,

y

=

a

b

x

.

Graph the model in the same window as the scatterplot to verify it is a
good fit for the data.
::::

::: {#Example_04_08_01 .example}
In 2007, a university study was published investigating the crash risk
of alcohol impaired driving. Data from 2,871 crashes were used to
measure the association of a person's blood alcohol level (BAC) with the
risk of being in an accident. [\#](#) shows results from the study [^2].
The *relative risk* is a measure of how many times more likely a person
is to crash. So, for example, a person with a BAC of 0.09 is 3.54 times
as likely to crash as a person who has not been drinking alcohol.

  ----------------------------- ------ ------ ------ ------- ------- -------
  *BAC*                         0      0.01   0.03   0.05    0.07    0.09
  *Relative Risk of Crashing*   1      1.03   1.06   1.38    2.09    3.54
  *BAC*                         0.11   0.13   0.15   0.17    0.19    0.21
  *Relative Risk of Crashing*   6.41   12.6   22.1   39.05   65.32   99.78
  ----------------------------- ------ ------ ------ ------- ------- -------

Let

x

represent the BAC level, and let

y

represent the corresponding relative risk. Use exponential regression to
fit a model to these data.

After 6 drinks, a person weighing 160 pounds will have a BAC of about

0.16.

How many times more likely is a person with this weight to crash if they
drive after having a 6-pack of beer? Round to the nearest hundredth.

Using the

STAT

then

EDIT

menu on a graphing utility, list the

BAC

values in L1 and the relative risk values in L2. Then use the

STATPLOT

feature to verify that the scatterplot follows the exponential pattern
shown in

:

<figure id="CNX_Precalc_Figure_04_08_001">

</figure>

Use the "*ExpReg*" command from the *STAT* then *CALC* menu to obtain
the exponential model,

$$y = 0.58304829\left( {2.20720213\text{E}10} \right)^{x}$$

Converting from scientific notation, we have:

$$y = 0.58304829\left( \text{22,072,021,300} \right)^{x}$$

Notice that r 2 ≈0.97 which indicates the model is a good fit to the
data. To see this, graph the model in the same window as the scatterplot
to verify it is a good fit as shown in [\#](#):

<figure id="CNX_Precalc_Figure_04_08_002">

</figure>

Use the model to estimate the risk associated with a BAC of 0.16.
Substitute 0.16 for x in the model and solve for y.

$$\begin{array}{lll}
y & {= 0.58304829\left( \text{22,072,021,300} \right)^{x}} & {\text{Use~the~regression~model~found~in~part~(a)}\text{.}} \\
 & {= 0.58304829\left( \text{22,072,021,300} \right)^{0.16}} & {\text{Substitute~0}\text{.16~for~}x\text{.}} \\
 & {\approx \text{26}\text{.35}} & {\text{Round~to~the~nearest~hundredth}\text{.}}
\end{array}$$

If a 160-pound person drives after having 6 drinks, they are about 26.35
times more likely to crash than if driving while sober.
:::

:::: {#fs-id1530201 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

[\#](#) shows a recent graduate's credit card balance each month after
graduation.

  ------------- -------- -------- -------- --------- --------- --------- --------- ---------
  *Month*       1        2        3        4         5         6         7         8
  *Debt (\$)*   620.00   761.88   899.80   1039.93   1270.63   1589.04   1851.31   2154.92
  ------------- -------- -------- -------- --------- --------- --------- --------- ---------

ⓐ Use exponential regression to fit a model to these data. ⓑ If spending
continues at this rate, what will the graduate's credit card debt be one
year after graduating?

ⓐ

The exponential regression model that fits these data is

y

=

522.88585984

(

1.19645256

)

x

.

ⓑ

If spending continues at this rate, the graduate's credit card debt will
be \$4,499.38 after one year.
::::

:::: {#fs-id1395488 .note}
::: title
:::

Q&A

*Is it reasonable to assume that an exponential regression model will
represent a situation indefinitely?*

*No. Remember that models are formed by real-world data gathered for
regression. It is usually reasonable to make estimates within the
interval of original observation (interpolation). However, when a model
is used to make predictions, it is important to use reasoning skills to
determine whether the model makes sense for inputs far beyond the
original observation interval (extrapolation).*
::::

# Building a Logarithmic Model from Data {#fs-id1137429}

Just as with exponential functions, there are many real-world
applications for logarithmic functions: intensity of sound, pH levels of
solutions, yields of chemical reactions, production of goods, and growth
of infants. As with exponential models, data modeled by logarithmic
functions are either always increasing or always decreasing as time
moves forward. Again, it is the *way* they increase or decrease that
helps us determine whether a logarithmic model is best.

Recall that logarithmic functions increase or decrease rapidly at first,
but then steadily slow as time moves on. By reflecting on the
characteristics we've already learned about this function, we can better
analyze real world situations that reflect this type of growth or decay.
When performing logarithmic regression analysis, we use the form of the
logarithmic function most commonly used on graphing utilities, y=a+bln(
x ). For this function

All input values,

x

,

must be greater than zero.

The point

(

1

,

a

)

is on the graph of the model.

If

b

\>

0

,

the model is increasing. Growth increases rapidly at first and then
steadily slows over time.

If

b

\<

0

,

the model is decreasing. Decay occurs rapidly at first and then steadily
slows over time.

:::: {#fs-id1675578 .note}
::: title
Logarithmic Regression
:::

*Logarithmic regression* is used to model situations where growth or
decay accelerates rapidly at first and then slows over time. We use the
command "LnReg" on a graphing utility to fit a logarithmic function to a
set of data points. This returns an equation of the form,

$$y = a + b\ln(x)$$

Note that

all input values,

x

,

must be non-negative.

when

b

\>

0

,

the model is increasing.

when

b

\<

0

,

the model is decreasing.
::::

:::: {#fs-id1530388 .note}
::: title
:::

How To

*Given a set of data, perform logarithmic regression using a graphing
utility.*

Use the

STAT

then

EDIT

menu to enter given data.

Clear any existing data from the lists.

List the input values in the L1 column.

List the output values in the L2 column.

Graph and observe a scatter plot of the data using the

STATPLOT

feature.

Use

ZOOM

\[

9

\] to adjust axes to fit the data.

Verify the data follow a logarithmic pattern.

Find the equation that models the data.

Select "

LnReg

" from the

STAT

then

CALC

menu.

Use the values returned for

a

and

b

to record the model,

y

=

a

\+

b

ln

(

x

)

.

Graph the model in the same window as the scatterplot to verify it is a
good fit for the data.
::::

::: {#Example_04_08_02 .example}
Due to advances in medicine and higher standards of living, life
expectancy has been increasing in most developed countries since the
beginning of the 20th century.

[\#](#) shows the average life expectancies, in years, of Americans from
1900--2010[^3].

  -------------------------- ------ ------ ------ ------ ------ ------
  *Year*                     1900   1910   1920   1930   1940   1950
  *Life Expectancy(Years)*   47.3   50.0   54.1   59.7   62.9   68.2
  *Year*                     1960   1970   1980   1990   2000   2010
  *Life Expectancy(Years)*   69.7   70.8   73.7   75.4   76.8   78.7
  -------------------------- ------ ------ ------ ------ ------ ------

ⓐ

Let

x

represent time in decades starting with

x

=

1

for the year 1900,

x

=

2

for the year 1910, and so on. Let

y

represent the corresponding life expectancy. Use logarithmic regression
to fit a model to these data.

ⓑ

Use the model to predict the average American life expectancy for the
year 2030.

ⓐ

Using the

STAT

then

EDIT

menu on a graphing utility, list the years using values 1--12 in L1 and
the corresponding life expectancy in L2. Then use the

STATPLOT

feature to verify that the scatterplot follows a logarithmic pattern as
shown in

:

<figure id="CNX_Precalc_Figure_04_08_003">

</figure>

Use the "*LnReg*" command from the *STAT* then *CALC* menu to obtain the
logarithmic model,

$$y = 42.52722583 + 13.85752327\ln(x)$$

Next, graph the model in the same window as the scatterplot to verify it
is a good fit as shown in [\#](#):

<figure id="CNX_Precalc_Figure_04_08_004">

</figure>

ⓑ

To predict the life expectancy of an American in the year 2030,
substitute

x

=

14

for the in the model and solve for

y

:

$$\begin{array}{lll}
y & {= 42.52722583 + 13.85752327\ln(x)} & {\text{Use~the~regression~model~found~in~part~(a)}\text{.}} \\
 & {= 42.52722583 + 13.85752327\ln(14)} & {\text{Substitute~14~for~}x\text{.}} \\
 & {\approx \text{79}\text{.1}} & \text{Round~to~the~nearest~tenth.}
\end{array}$$

If life expectancy continues to increase at this pace, the average life
expectancy of an American will be 79.1 by the year 2030.
:::

:::: {#fs-id1338539 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Sales of a video game released in the year 2000 took off at first, but
then steadily slowed as time moved on. [\#](#) shows the number of games
sold, in thousands, from the years 2000--2010.

  --------------------------- ------ ------ ------ ------ ------ ------
  *Year*                      2000   2001   2002   2003   2004   2005
  *Number Sold (thousands)*   142    149    154    155    159    161
  *Year*                      2006   2007   2008   2009   2010   \-
  *Number Sold (thousands)*   163    164    164    166    167    \-
  --------------------------- ------ ------ ------ ------ ------ ------

ⓐ

Let

x

represent time in years starting with

x

=

1

for the year 2000. Let

y

represent the number of games sold in thousands. Use logarithmic
regression to fit a model to these data.

ⓑ

If games continue to sell at this rate, how many games will sell in
2015? Round to the nearest thousand.

ⓐ

The logarithmic regression model that fits these data is

y

=

141.91242949

\+

10.45366573

ln

(

x

)

ⓑ

If sales continue at this rate, about 171,000 games will be sold in the
year 2015.
::::

# Building a Logistic Model from Data {#fs-id1599403}

Like exponential and logarithmic growth, logistic growth increases over
time. One of the most notable differences with logistic growth models is
that, at a certain point, growth steadily slows and the function
approaches an upper bound, or *limiting value*. Because of this,
logistic regression is best for modeling phenomena where there are
limits in expansion, such as availability of living space or nutrients.

It is worth pointing out that logistic functions actually model
resource-limited exponential growth. There are many examples of this
type of growth in real-world situations, including population growth and
spread of disease, rumors, and even stains in fabric. When performing
logistic regression analysis, we use the form most commonly used on
graphing utilities:

$$y = \frac{c}{1 + ae^{- bx}}$$

Recall that:

c

1

\+

a

is the initial value of the model.

when

b

\>

0

,

the model increases rapidly at first until it reaches its point of
maximum growth rate,

(

ln

(

a

)

b

,

c

2

)

.

At that point, growth steadily slows and the function becomes asymptotic
to the upper bound

y

=

c

.

c

is the limiting value, sometimes called the

carrying capacity

, of the model.

:::: {#fs-id1454974 .note}
::: title
Logistic Regression
:::

*Logistic regression* is used to model situations where growth
accelerates rapidly at first and then steadily slows to an upper limit.
We use the command "Logistic" on a graphing utility to fit a logistic
function to a set of data points. This returns an equation of the form

$$y = \frac{c}{1 + ae^{- bx}}$$

Note that

The initial value of the model is

c

1

\+

a

.

Output values for the model grow closer and closer to

y

=

c

as time increases.
::::

:::: {#fs-id1361145 .note}
::: title
:::

How To

*Given a set of data, perform logistic regression using a graphing
utility.*

Use the

STAT

then

EDIT

menu to enter given data.

Clear any existing data from the lists.

List the input values in the L1 column.

List the output values in the L2 column.

Graph and observe a scatter plot of the data using the

STATPLOT

feature.

Use

ZOOM

\[

9

\] to adjust axes to fit the data.

Verify the data follow a logistic pattern.

Find the equation that models the data.

Select "

Logistic

" from the

STAT

then

CALC

menu.

Use the values returned for

a

,

b

,

and

c

to record the model,

y

=

c

1

\+

a

e

−

b

x

.

Graph the model in the same window as the scatterplot to verify it is a
good fit for the data.
::::

::: {#Example_04_08_03 .example}
Mobile telephone service has increased rapidly in America since the mid
1990s. Today, almost all residents have cellular service. [\#](#) shows
the percentage of Americans with cellular service between the years 1995
and 2012 [^4].

  Year   Americans with Cellular Service (%)   Year   Americans with Cellular Service (%)
  ------ ------------------------------------- ------ -------------------------------------
  1995   12.69                                 2004   62.852
  1996   16.35                                 2005   68.63
  1997   20.29                                 2006   76.64
  1998   25.08                                 2007   82.47
  1999   30.81                                 2008   85.68
  2000   38.75                                 2009   89.14
  2001   45.00                                 2010   91.86
  2002   49.16                                 2011   95.28
  2003   55.15                                 2012   98.17

ⓐ

Let

x

represent time in years starting with

x

=

0

for the year 1995. Let

y

represent the corresponding percentage of residents with cellular
service. Use logistic regression to fit a model to these data.

ⓑ

Use the model to calculate the percentage of Americans with cell service
in the year 2013. Round to the nearest tenth of a percent.

ⓒ

Discuss the value returned for the upper limit,

c

.

What does this tell you about the model? What would the limiting value
be if the model were exact?

ⓐ

Using the

STAT

then

EDIT

menu on a graphing utility, list the years using values 0--15 in L1 and
the corresponding percentage in L2. Then use the

STATPLOT

feature to verify that the scatterplot follows a logistic pattern as
shown in

:

<figure id="CNX_Precalc_Figure_04_08_005">

</figure>

Use the "*Logistic*" command from the *STAT* then *CALC* menu to obtain
the logistic model,

$$y = \frac{105.7379526}{1 + 6.88328979e^{- 0.2595440013x}}$$

Next, graph the model in the same window as shown in [\#](#) the
scatterplot to verify it is a good fit:

<figure id="CNX_Precalc_Figure_04_08_006">

</figure>

ⓑ

To approximate the percentage of Americans with cellular service in the
year 2013, substitute x=18 for the in the model and solve for y:

$$\begin{array}{lll}
y & {= \frac{105.7379526}{1 + 6.88328979e^{- 0.2595440013x}}} & {\text{Use~the~regression~model~found~in~part~(a)}.} \\
 & {= \frac{105.7379526}{1 + 6.88328979e^{- 0.2595440013(18)}}} & {\text{Substitute~18~for~}x.} \\
 & {\approx \text{99}\text{.3~}} & \text{Round~to~the~nearest~tenth}
\end{array}$$

According to the model, about 99.3% of Americans had cellular service in
2013.

ⓒ

The model gives a limiting value of about 105. This means that the
maximum possible percentage of Americans with cellular service would be
105%, which is impossible. (How could over 100% of a population have
cellular service?) If the model were exact, the limiting value would be
c=100 and the model's outputs would get very close to, but never
actually reach 100%. After all, there will always be someone out there
without cellular service!
:::

:::: {#fs-id1394388 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

[\#](#) shows the population, in thousands, of harbor seals in the
Wadden Sea over the years 1997 to 2012.

  Year   Seal Population (Thousands)   Year   Seal Population (Thousands)
  ------ ----------------------------- ------ -----------------------------
  1997   3.493                         2005   19.590
  1998   5.282                         2006   21.955
  1999   6.357                         2007   22.862
  2000   9.201                         2008   23.869
  2001   11.224                        2009   24.243
  2002   12.964                        2010   24.344
  2003   16.226                        2011   24.919
  2004   18.137                        2012   25.108

ⓐ

Let

x

represent time in years starting with

x

=

0

for the year 1997. Let

y

represent the number of seals in thousands. Use logistic regression to
fit a model to these data.

ⓑ

Use the model to predict the seal population for the year 2020.

ⓒ

To the nearest whole number, what is the limiting value of this model?

ⓐ

The logistic regression model that fits these data is

y

=

25.65665979

1

\+

6.113686306

e

−

0.3852149008

x

.

ⓑ

If the population continues to grow at this rate, there will be about

25,634

seals in 2020.

ⓒ

To the nearest whole number, the carrying capacity is 25,657.
::::

:::: {#fs-id1384374 .note}
::: title
:::

Media

Access this online resource for additional instruction and practice with
exponential function models.

Exponential Regression on a Calculator
::::

# Key Concepts {#fs-id1294229}

Exponential regression is used to model situations where growth begins
slowly and then accelerates rapidly without bound, or where decay begins
rapidly and then slows down to get closer and closer to zero.

We use the command "ExpReg" on a graphing utility to fit function of the
form

y

=

a

b

x

to a set of data points. See

.

Logarithmic regression is used to model situations where growth or decay
accelerates rapidly at first and then slows over time.

We use the command "LnReg" on a graphing utility to fit a function of
the form

y

=

a

\+

b

ln

(

x

)

to a set of data points. See

.

Logistic regression is used to model situations where growth accelerates
rapidly at first and then steadily slows as the function approaches an
upper limit.

We use the command "Logistic" on a graphing utility to fit a function of
the form

y

=

c

1

\+

a

e

−

b

x

to a set of data points. See

.

# Section Exercises {#fs-id1700714}

## Verbal {#fs-id1700718}

What situations are best modeled by a logistic equation? Give an
example, and state a case for why the example is a good fit.

Logistic models are best used for situations that have limited values.
For example, populations cannot grow indefinitely since resources such
as food, water, and space are limited, so a logistic model best
describes populations.

What is a carrying capacity? What kind of model has a carrying capacity
built into its formula? Why does this make sense?

What is regression analysis? Describe the process of performing
regression analysis on a graphing utility.

Regression analysis is the process of finding an equation that best fits
a given set of data points. To perform a regression analysis on a
graphing utility, first list the given points using the STAT then EDIT
menu. Next graph the scatter plot using the STAT PLOT feature. The shape
of the data points on the scatter graph can help determine which
regression feature to use. Once this is determined, select the
appropriate regression analysis command from the STAT then CALC menu.

What might a scatterplot of data points look like if it were best
described by a logarithmic model?

What does the *y*-intercept on the graph of a logistic equation
correspond to for a population modeled by that equation?

The *y*-intercept on the graph of a logistic equation corresponds to the
initial population for the population model.

## Graphical {#fs-id1457107}

For the following exercises, match the given function of best fit with
the appropriate scatterplot in [\#](#) through [\#](#). Answer using the
letter beneath the matching graph.

<figure id="CNX_PreCalc_Figure_04_08_201">

</figure>

<figure id="CNX_PreCalc_Figure_04_08_202">

</figure>

<figure id="CNX_PreCalc_Figure_04_08_203">

</figure>

<figure id="CNX_PreCalc_Figure_04_08_204">

</figure>

<figure id="CNX_PreCalc_Figure_04_08_205">

</figure>

y=10.209 e −0.294x

y=5.598−1.912ln(x)

C

y=2.104 ( 1.479 ) x

y=4.607+2.733ln(x)

B

y= 14.005 1+2.79 e −0.812x

## Numeric {#fs-id1659453}

To the nearest whole number, what is the initial value of a population
modeled by the logistic equation P(t)= 175 1+6.995 e −0.68t ? What is
the carrying capacity?

P(0)=22 ; 175

Rewrite the exponential model A(t)=1550 ( 1.085 ) x as an equivalent
model with base e. Express the exponent to four significant digits.

A logarithmic model is given by the equation h(p)=67.682−5.792ln( p ).
To the nearest hundredth, for what value of p does h(p)=62?

p≈2.67

A logistic model is given by the equation P(t)= 90 1+5 e −0.42t . To the
nearest hundredth, for what value of *t* does P(t)=45?

What is the *y*-intercept on the graph of the logistic model given in
the previous exercise?

*y*-intercept: ( 0,15 )

## Technology {#fs-id1702994}

For the following exercises, use this scenario: The population P of a
koi pond over x months is modeled by the function P(x)= 68 1+16 e −0.28x
.

Graph the population model to show the population over a span of 3
years.

What was the initial population of koi?

4 koi

How many koi will the pond have after one and a half years?

How many months will it take before there are 20 koi in the pond?

about 6.8 months.

Use the intersect feature to approximate the number of months it will
take before the population of the pond reaches half its carrying
capacity.

For the following exercises, use this scenario: The population P of an
endangered species habitat for wolves is modeled by the function P(x)=
558 1+54.8 e −0.462x , where x is given in years.

Graph the population model to show the population over a span of 10
years.

What was the initial population of wolves transported to the habitat?

How many wolves will the habitat have after 3 years?

About 38 wolves

How many years will it take before there are 100 wolves in the habitat?

Use the intersect feature to approximate the number of years it will
take before the population of the habitat reaches half its carrying
capacity.

About 8.7 years

For the following exercises, refer to [\#](#).

  ------ ------ ------ ------ ------ ------ ------
  x      1      2      3      4      5      6
  f(x)   1125   1495   2310   3294   4650   6361
  ------ ------ ------ ------ ------ ------ ------

Use a graphing calculator to create a scatter diagram of the data.

Use the regression feature to find an exponential function that best
fits the data in the table.

f(x)= 776.682(1.426)x

Write the exponential function as an exponential equation with base e.

Graph the exponential equation on the scatter diagram.

Use the intersect feature to find the value of x for which f(x)=4000.

For the following exercises, refer to [\#](#).

  ------ ----- ----- ----- ----- ----- -----
  x      1     2     3     4     5     6
  f(x)   555   383   307   210   158   122
  ------ ----- ----- ----- ----- ----- -----

Use a graphing calculator to create a scatter diagram of the data.

Use the regression feature to find an exponential function that best
fits the data in the table.

Write the exponential function as an exponential equation with base e.

f(x)= 731.92e-0.3038x

Graph the exponential equation on the scatter diagram.

Use the intersect feature to find the value of x for which f(x)=250.

When f(x)= 250, x≈3.6

For the following exercises, refer to [\#](#).

  ------ ----- ----- ----- ----- ----- -----
  x      1     2     3     4     5     6
  f(x)   5.1   6.3   7.3   7.7   8.1   8.6
  ------ ----- ----- ----- ----- ----- -----

Use a graphing calculator to create a scatter diagram of the data.

Use the LOGarithm option of the REGression feature to find a logarithmic
function of the form y=a+bln( x ) that best fits the data in the table.

y=5.063+1.934log(x)

Use the logarithmic function to find the value of the function when
x=10.

Graph the logarithmic equation on the scatter diagram.

Use the intersect feature to find the value of x for which f(x)=7.

For the following exercises, refer to [\#](#).

  ------ ----- --- ----- ----- ----- ----- ----- -----
  x      1     2   3     4     5     6     7     8
  f(x)   7.5   6   5.2   4.3   3.9   3.4   3.1   2.9
  ------ ----- --- ----- ----- ----- ----- ----- -----

Use a graphing calculator to create a scatter diagram of the data.

Use the *LOG*arithm option of the *REG*ression feature to find a
logarithmic function of the form y=a+bln( x ) that best fits the data in
the table.

Use the logarithmic function to find the value of the function when
x=10.

When f(10) ≈2.3

Graph the logarithmic equation on the scatter diagram.

Use the intersect feature to find the value of x for which f(x)=8.

When f(x)= 8, x≈0.82

For the following exercises, refer to [\#](#).

  ------ ----- ------ ------ ------ ------ ------ ------ ---- ------ ------
  x      1     2      3      4      5      6      7      8    9      10
  f(x)   8.7   12.3   15.4   18.5   20.7   22.5   23.3   24   24.6   24.8
  ------ ----- ------ ------ ------ ------ ------ ------ ---- ------ ------

Use a graphing calculator to create a scatter diagram of the data.

Use the LOGISTIC regression option to find a logistic growth model of
the form y= c 1+a e −bx that best fits the data in the table.

f(x)= 25.081 1+3.182 e −0.545x

Graph the logistic equation on the scatter diagram.

To the nearest whole number, what is the predicted carrying capacity of
the model?

About 25

Use the intersect feature to find the value of x for which the model
reaches half its carrying capacity.

For the following exercises, refer to [\#](#).

  ------ ---- ------ ------ ------ ------ ------- ------- ------- ------- -------
  x      0    2      4      5      7      8       10      11      15      17
  f(x)   12   28.6   52.8   70.3   99.9   112.5   125.8   127.9   135.1   135.9
  ------ ---- ------ ------ ------ ------ ------- ------- ------- ------- -------

Use a graphing calculator to create a scatter diagram of the data.

Use the LOGISTIC regression option to find a logistic growth model of
the form y= c 1+a e −bx that best fits the data in the table.

Graph the logistic equation on the scatter diagram.

To the nearest whole number, what is the predicted carrying capacity of
the model?

Use the intersect feature to find the value of x for which the model
reaches half its carrying capacity.

When f(x)= 68, x≈4.9

## Extensions {#fs-id1583097}

Recall that the general form of a logistic equation for a population is
given by P(t)= c 1+a e −bt , such that the initial population at time
t=0 is P(0)= P 0 . Show algebraically that c−P(t) P(t) = c− P 0 P 0 e
−bt .

Use a graphing utility to find an exponential regression formula f(x)
and a logarithmic regression formula g(x) for the points ( 1.5,1.5 ) and
( 8.5,8.5 ). Round all numbers to 6 decimal places. Graph the points and
both formulas along with the line y=x on the same axis. Make a
conjecture about the relationship of the regression formulas.

f(x)= 1.034341(1.281204)x ; g(x)= 4.035510 ; the regression curves are
symmetrical about y=x , so it appears that they are inverse functions.

Verify the conjecture made in the previous exercise. Round all numbers
to six decimal places when necessary.

Find the inverse function f −1 ( x ) for the logistic function f(x)= c
1+a e −bx . Show all steps.

f −1 ( x ) = ln(a)-ln(cx-1) b

Use the result from the previous exercise to graph the logistic model
P(t)= 20 1+4 e −0.5t along with its inverse on the same axis. What are
the intercepts and asymptotes of each function?

# Chapter Review Exercises {#fs-id1582712}

## [Exponential Functions](#) {#fs-id1582715}

Determine whether the function y=156 ( 0.825 ) t represents exponential
growth, exponential decay, or neither. Explain

exponential decay; The growth factor, 0.825, is between 0 and 1.

The population of a herd of deer is represented by the function A(t)=205
(1.13) t , where t is given in years. To the nearest whole number, what
will the herd population be after 6 years?

Find an exponential equation that passes through the points (2, 2.25)
and (5,60.75).

y=0.25 ( 3 ) x

Determine whether [\#](#) could represent a function that is linear,
exponential, or neither. If it appears to be exponential, find a
function that passes through the points.

  ------ --- ----- ------ -------
  x      1   2     3      4
  f(x)   3   0.9   0.27   0.081
  ------ --- ----- ------ -------

A retirement account is opened with an initial deposit of \$8,500 and
earns 8.12% interest compounded monthly. What will the account be worth
in 20 years?

\$42,888.18

Hsu-Mei wants to save \$5,000 for a down payment on a car. To the
nearest dollar, how much will she need to invest in an account now with
7.5% APR, compounded daily, in order to reach her goal in 3 years?

Does the equation y=2.294 e −0.654t represent continuous growth,
continuous decay, or neither? Explain.

continuous decay; the growth rate is negative.

Suppose an investment account is opened with an initial deposit of
\$10,500 earning 6.25% interest, compounded continuously. How much will
the account be worth after 25 years?

## [Graphs of Exponential Functions](#) {#fs-id1407749}

Graph the function f(x)=3.5 ( 2 ) x . State the domain and range and
give the *y*-intercept.

domain: all real numbers; range: all real numbers strictly greater than
zero; *y*-intercept: (0, 3.5);

Graph the function f(x)=4 ( 1 8 ) x and its reflection about the
*y*-axis on the same axes, and give the *y*-intercept.

The graph of f(x)= 6.5 x is reflected about the *y*-axis and stretched
vertically by a factor of 7. What is the equation of the new function,
g(x)? State its *y*-intercept, domain, and range.

g(x)=7 ( 6.5 ) −x ; *y*-intercept: (0,7); Domain: all real numbers;
Range: all real numbers greater than 0.

The graph below shows transformations of the graph of f(x)= 2 x . What
is the equation for the transformation?

<figure id="eip-idm855609696">

</figure>

## [Logarithmic Functions](#) {#fs-id1586983}

Rewrite log 17 ( 4913 )=x as an equivalent exponential equation.

17 x =4913

Rewrite ln( s )=t as an equivalent exponential equation.

Rewrite a − 2 5 =b as an equivalent logarithmic equation.

log a b=− 2 5

Rewrite e −3.5 =h as an equivalent logarithmic equation.

Solve for *x* if log 64 (x)= 1 3 by converting the logarithmic equation
log 64 (x)= 1 3 to exponential form.

x= 64 1 3 =4

Evaluate log 5 ( 1 125 ) without using a calculator.

Evaluate log( 0.000001 ) without using a calculator.

log( 0.000001 )=−6

Evaluate log(4.005) using a calculator. Round to the nearest thousandth.

Evaluate ln( e −0.8648 ) without using a calculator.

ln( e −0.8648 )=−0.8648

Evaluate ln( 18 3 ) using a calculator. Round to the nearest thousandth.

## [Graphs of Logarithmic Functions](#) {#fs-id1459475}

Graph the function g(x)=log( 7x+21 )−4.

Graph the function h(x)=2ln( 9−3x )+1.

State the domain, vertical asymptote, and end behavior of the function
g(x)=ln( 4x+20 )−17.

Domain: x\>−5; Vertical asymptote: x=−5; End behavior: as x→− 5 +
,f(x)→−∞ and as x→∞,f(x)→∞.

## [Logarithmic Properties](#) {#fs-id1807970}

Rewrite ln( 7r⋅11st ) in expanded form.

Rewrite log 8 ( x )+ log 8 ( 5 )+ log 8 ( y )+ log 8 ( 13 ) in compact
form.

log 8 ( 65xy )

Rewrite log m ( 67 83 ) in expanded form.

Rewrite ln( z )−ln( x )−ln( y ) in compact form.

ln( z xy )

Rewrite ln( 1 x 5 ) as a product.

Rewrite − log y ( 1 12 ) as a single logarithm.

log y ( 12 )

Use properties of logarithms to expand log( r 2 s 11 t 14 ).

Use properties of logarithms to expand ln( 2b b+1 b−1 ).

ln( 2 )+ln( b )+ ln( b+1 )−ln( b−1 ) 2

Condense the expression 5ln( b )+ln( c )+ ln( 4−a ) 2 to a single
logarithm.

Condense the expression 3 log 7 v+6 log 7 w− log 7 u 3 to a single
logarithm.

log 7 ( v 3 w 6 u 3 )

Rewrite log 3 ( 12.75 ) to base e.

Rewrite 5 12x−17 =125 as a logarithm. Then apply the change of base
formula to solve for x using the common log. Round to the nearest
thousandth.

x= log( 125 ) log( 5 ) +17 12 = 5 3

## [Exponential and Logarithmic Equations](#) {#fs-id1376798}

Solve 216 3x ⋅ 216 x = 36 3x+2 by rewriting each side with a common
base.

Solve 125 ( 1 625 ) −x−3 = 5 3 by rewriting each side with a common
base.

x=−3

Use logarithms to find the exact solution for 7⋅ 17 −9x −7=49. If there
is no solution, write *no solution*.

Use logarithms to find the exact solution for 3 e 6n−2 +1=−60. If there
is no solution, write *no solution*.

no solution

Find the exact solution for 5 e 3x −4=6 . If there is no solution, write
*no solution*.

Find the exact solution for 2 e 5x−2 −9=−56. If there is no solution,
write *no solution*.

no solution

Find the exact solution for 5 2x−3 = 7 x+1 . If there is no solution,
write *no solution*.

Find the exact solution for e 2x − e x −110=0. If there is no solution,
write *no solution*.

x=ln( 11 )

Use the definition of a logarithm to solve. −5 log 7 ( 10n )=5.

Use the definition of a logarithm to find the exact solution for 9+6ln(
a+3 )=33.

a= e 4 −3

Use the one-to-one property of logarithms to find an exact solution for
log 8 ( 7 )+ log 8 ( −4x )= log 8 ( 5 ). If there is no solution, write
*no solution*.

Use the one-to-one property of logarithms to find an exact solution for
ln( 5 )+ln( 5 x 2 −5 )=ln( 56 ). If there is no solution, write *no
solution*.

x=± 9 5

The formula for measuring sound intensity in decibels D is defined by
the equation D=10log( I I 0 ), where I is the intensity of the sound in
watts per square meter and I 0 = 10 −12 is the lowest level of sound
that the average person can hear. How many decibels are emitted from a
large orchestra with a sound intensity of 6.3⋅ 10 −3 watts per square
meter?

The population of a city is modeled by the equation P(t)=256,114 e 0.25t
where t is measured in years. If the city continues to grow at this
rate, how many years will it take for the population to reach one
million?

about 5.45 years

Find the inverse function f −1 for the exponential function f( x )=2⋅ e
x+1 −5.

Find the inverse function f −1 for the logarithmic function f( x )=0.25⋅
log 2 ( x 3 +1 ).

f −1 ( x )= 2 4x −1 3

## [Exponential and Logarithmic Models](#) {#fs-id1563711}

For the following exercises, use this scenario: A doctor prescribes 300
milligrams of a therapeutic drug that decays by about 17% each hour.

To the nearest minute, what is the half-life of the drug?

Write an exponential model representing the amount of the drug remaining
in the patient's system after t hours. Then use the formula to find the
amount of the drug that would remain in the patient's system after 24
hours. Round to the nearest hundredth of a gram.

f(t)=300 ( 0.83 ) t ;f(24)≈3.43  g

For the following exercises, use this scenario: A soup with an internal
temperature of 350° Fahrenheit was taken off the stove to cool in a 71°F
room. After fifteen minutes, the internal temperature of the soup was
175°F.

Use Newton's Law of Cooling to write a formula that models this
situation.

How many minutes will it take the soup to cool to 85°F?

about 45 minutes

For the following exercises, use this scenario: The equation N( t )=
1200 1+199 e −0.625t models the number of people in a school who have
heard a rumor after t days.

How many people started the rumor?

To the nearest tenth, how many days will it be before the rumor spreads
to half the carrying capacity?

about 8.5 days

What is the carrying capacity?

For the following exercises, enter the data from each table into a
graphing calculator and graph the resulting scatter plots. Determine
whether the data from the table would likely represent a function that
is linear, exponential, or logarithmic.

  ---- -------
  x    f(x)
  1    3.05
  2    4.42
  3    6.4
  4    9.28
  5    13.46
  6    19.52
  7    28.3
  8    41.04
  9    59.5
  10   86.28
  ---- -------

exponential

  ----- -------
  x     f(x)
  0.5   18.05
  1     17
  3     15.33
  5     14.55
  7     14.04
  10    13.5
  12    13.22
  13    13.1
  15    12.88
  17    12.69
  20    12.45
  ----- -------

Find a formula for an exponential equation that goes through the points
( −2,100 ) and ( 0,4 ). Then express the formula as an equivalent
equation with base *e.*

y=4 ( 0.2 ) x ; y=4 e -1.609438x

## [Fitting Exponential Models to Data](#) {#fs-id1658476}

What is the carrying capacity for a population modeled by the logistic
equation P(t)= 250,000 1+499 e −0.45t ? What is the initial population
for the model?

The population of a culture of bacteria is modeled by the logistic
equation P(t)= 14,250 1+29 e −0.62t , where t is in days. To the nearest
tenth, how many days will it take the culture to reach 75% of its
carrying capacity?

about 7.2 days

For the following exercises, use a graphing utility to create a scatter
diagram of the data given in the table. Observe the shape of the scatter
diagram to determine whether the data is best described by an
exponential, logarithmic, or logistic model. Then use the appropriate
regression feature to find an equation that models the data. When
necessary, round values to five decimal places.

  ---- -------
  x    f(x)
  1    409.4
  2    260.7
  3    170.4
  4    110.6
  5    74
  6    44.7
  7    32.4
  8    19.5
  9    12.7
  10   8.1
  ---- -------

  ------ -------
  x      f(x)
  0.15   36.21
  0.25   28.88
  0.5    24.39
  0.75   18.28
  1      16.5
  1.5    12.99
  2      9.91
  2.25   8.57
  2.75   7.23
  3      5.99
  3.5    4.81
  ------ -------

logarithmic; y=16.68718−9.71860ln(x)

  ---- -------
  x    f(x)
  0    9
  2    22.6
  4    44.2
  5    62.1
  7    96.9
  8    113.4
  10   133.4
  11   137.6
  15   148.4
  17   149.3
  ---- -------

# Practice Test {#fs-id1513725}

The population of a pod of bottlenose dolphins is modeled by the
function A(t)=8 (1.17) t , where t is given in years. To the nearest
whole number, what will the pod population be after 3 years?

About 13 dolphins.

Find an exponential equation that passes through the points (0, 4) and
(2, 9).

Drew wants to save \$2,500 to go to the next World Cup. To the nearest
dollar, how much will he need to invest in an account now with 6.25%
APR, compounding daily, in order to reach his goal in 4 years?

\$1,947

An investment account was opened with an initial deposit of \$9,600 and
earns 7.4% interest, compounded continuously. How much will the account
be worth after 15 years?

Graph the function f(x)=5 ( 0.5 ) −x and its reflection across the
*y*-axis on the same axes, and give the *y*-intercept.

*y*-intercept: (0,5)

The graph shows transformations of the graph of f(x)= ( 1 2 ) x . What
is the equation for the transformation?

Rewrite log 8.5 ( 614.125 )=a as an equivalent exponential equation.

8.5 a =614.125

Rewrite e 1 2 =m as an equivalent logarithmic equation.

Solve for x by converting the logarithmic equation lo g 1 7 (x)=2 to
exponential form.

x= ( 1 7 ) 2 = 1 49

Evaluate log(10,000,000) without using a calculator.

Evaluate ln( 0.716 ) using a calculator. Round to the nearest
thousandth.

ln( 0.716 )≈−0.334

Graph the function g(x)=log( 12−6x )+3.

State the domain, vertical asymptote, and end behavior of the function
f(x)= log 5 ( 39−13x )+7.

Domain: x\<3; Vertical asymptote: x=3; End behavior: x→ 3 − ,f(x)→−∞ and
x→−∞,f(x)→∞

Rewrite log( 17a⋅2b ) as a sum.

Rewrite log t ( 96 )− log t ( 8 ) in compact form.

log t ( 12 )

Rewrite log 8 ( a 1 b ) as a product.

Use properties of logarithm to expand ln( y 3 z 2 ⋅ x−4 3 ).

3ln( y )+2ln( z )+ ln( x−4 ) 3

Condense the expression 4ln( c )+ln( d )+ ln( a ) 3 + ln( b+3 ) 3 to a
single logarithm.

Rewrite 16 3x−5 =1000 as a logarithm. Then apply the change of base
formula to solve for x using the natural log. Round to the nearest
thousandth.

x= ln( 1000 ) ln( 16 ) +5 3 ≈2.497

Solve ( 1 81 ) x ⋅ 1 243 = ( 1 9 ) −3x−1 by rewriting each side with a
common base.

Use logarithms to find the exact solution for −9 e 10a−8 −5=−41 . If
there is no solution, write *no solution*.

a= ln( 4 )+8 10

Find the exact solution for 10 e 4x+2 +5=56. If there is no solution,
write *no solution*.

Find the exact solution for −5 e −4x−1 −4=64. If there is no solution,
write *no solution*.

no solution

Find the exact solution for 2 x−3 = 6 2x−1 . If there is no solution,
write *no solution*.

Find the exact solution for e 2x − e x −72=0. If there is no solution,
write *no solution*.

x=ln( 9 )

Use the definition of a logarithm to find the exact solution for 4log(
2n )−7=−11

Use the one-to-one property of logarithms to find an exact solution for
log( 4 x 2 −10 )+log( 3 )=log( 51 ) If there is no solution, write *no
solution*.

x=± 3 3 2

The formula for measuring sound intensity in decibels D is defined by
the equation D=10log( I I 0 ), where I is the intensity of the sound in
watts per square meter and I 0 = 10 −12 is the lowest level of sound
that the average person can hear. How many decibels are emitted from a
rock concert with a sound intensity of 4.7⋅ 10 −1 watts per square
meter?

A radiation safety officer is working with 112 grams of a radioactive
substance. After 17 days, the sample has decayed to 80 grams. Rounding
to five significant digits, write an exponential equation representing
this situation. To the nearest day, what is the half-life of this
substance?

f(t)=112 e −.019792t ; half-life: about 35 days

Write the formula found in the previous exercise as an equivalent
equation with base e. Express the exponent to five significant digits.

A bottle of soda with a temperature of 71° Fahrenheit was taken off a
shelf and placed in a refrigerator with an internal temperature of 35°
F. After ten minutes, the internal temperature of the soda was 63° F.
Use Newton's Law of Cooling to write a formula that models this
situation. To the nearest degree, what will the temperature of the soda
be after one hour?

T(t)=36 e −0.025131t +35;T( 60 )≈ 43 o F

The population of a wildlife habitat is modeled by the equation P( t )=
360 1+6.2 e −0.35t , where t is given in years. How many animals were
originally transported to the habitat? How many years will it take
before the habitat reaches half its capacity?

Enter the data from [\#](#) into a graphing calculator and graph the
resulting scatter plot. Determine whether the data from the table would
likely represent a function that is linear, exponential, or logarithmic.

  ---- -------
  x    f(x)
  1    3
  2    8.55
  3    11.79
  4    14.09
  5    15.88
  6    17.33
  7    18.57
  8    19.64
  9    20.58
  10   21.42
  ---- -------

logarithmic

The population of a lake of fish is modeled by the logistic equation
P(t)= 16,120 1+25 e −0.75t , where t is time in years. To the nearest
hundredth, how many years will it take the lake to reach 80% of its
carrying capacity?

For the following exercises, use a graphing utility to create a scatter
diagram of the data given in the table. Observe the shape of the scatter
diagram to determine whether the data is best described by an
exponential, logarithmic, or logistic model. Then use the appropriate
regression feature to find an equation that models the data. When
necessary, round values to five decimal places.

  ---- -------
  x    f(x)
  1    20
  2    21.6
  3    29.2
  4    36.4
  5    46.6
  6    55.7
  7    72.6
  8    87.1
  9    107.2
  10   138.1
  ---- -------

exponential; y=15.10062 ( 1.24621 ) x

  ---- -------
  x    f(x)
  3    13.98
  4    17.84
  5    20.01
  6    22.7
  7    24.1
  8    26.15
  9    27.37
  10   28.38
  11   29.97
  12   31.07
  13   31.43
  ---- -------

  ----- ------
  x     f(x)
  0     2.2
  0.5   2.9
  1     3.9
  1.5   4.8
  2     6.4
  3     9.3
  4     12.3
  5     15
  6     16.2
  7     17.3
  8     17.9
  ----- ------

logistic; y= 18.41659 1+7.54644 e −0.68375x

[^1]: Selected data from
    http://classic.globe.gov/fsl/scientistsblog/2007/10/. Retrieved Aug
    3, 2010

[^2]: Source:

    Indiana University Center for Studies of Law in Action, 2007

[^3]: Source:

    Center for Disease Control and Prevention, 2013

[^4]: Source:

    The World Bank, 2013
