m49386

> 

8988dff6-f836-4082-a85e-361ec0b56437

<figure id="Figure_06_00_001">

</figure>

The sun has played a core role in many religions. The ancient Egyptian
culture portrayed the sun god, Ra (sometimes written as Re), as
undertaking a two-part daily journey, with one portion in the sky (day)
and the other through the underworld (night). Surya, the Hindu sun god,
traces a similar path through the sky on a chariot pulled by seven
horses. While their origins and associated narratives are quite
different, both Ra and Surya are primary deities and seen as creators
and preservers of life. In many Native American cultures, the sun is
core to spiritual and religious practice, but is not always a deity. The
Sun Dance, practiced differently by many Native American tribes, was a
ceremony that generally paid homage to the sun and, in many cases,
tested or expressed the strength of the tribe\'s people.

As one of the most most prominent natural phenomena and with its close
association to giving life, the sun was an obvious subject for
reverence. And its regularity, even in ancient times, made it the
primary determinant of time. Each day, the sun rises in an easterly
direction, approaches some maximum height relative to the celestial
equator, and sets in a westerly direction. The celestial equator is an
imaginary line that divides the visible universe into two halves in much
the same way Earth's equator is an imaginary line that divides the
planet into two halves. The exact path the sun appears to follow depends
on the exact location on Earth, but each location observes a predictable
pattern over time.

The pattern of the sun's motion throughout the course of a year is a
periodic function. Creating a visual representation of a periodic
function in the form of a graph can help us analyze the properties of
the function. In this chapter, we will investigate graphs of sine,
cosine, and other trigonometric functions.
