m49387

> In this section, you will:
>
> Graph variations of  
>
> y
>
> =
>
> sin
>
> (
>
> x
>
> )
>
>  and
>
> y
>
> =
>
> cos
>
> (
>
> x
>
> )
>
>  .
>
> Use phase shifts of sine and cosine curves.

ec87ee19-d627-4c06-89a0-2bd96aa3f402

<figure id="Figure_06_01_001">

</figure>

White light, such as the light from the sun, is not actually white at
all. Instead, it is a composition of all the colors of the rainbow in
the form of waves. The individual colors can be seen only when white
light passes through an optical prism that separates the waves according
to their wavelengths to form a rainbow.

Light waves can be represented graphically by the sine function. In the
chapter on [Trigonometric Functions](#), we examined trigonometric
functions such as the sine function. In this section, we will interpret
and create graphs of sine and cosine functions.

# Graphing Sine and Cosine Functions {#fs-id1165135169322}

Recall that the sine and cosine functions relate real number values to
the *x*- and *y*-coordinates of a point on the unit circle. So what do
they look like on a graph on a coordinate plane? Let's start with the
sine function. We can create a table of values and use them to sketch a
graph. [\#](#) lists some of the values for the sine function on a unit
circle.

  -------------- --- ----- ----- ----- ----- ------ ------ ------ ---
  *x*            0   π 6   π 4   π 3   π 2   2π 3   3π 4   5π 6   π
  *sin( x )*     0   1 2   2 2   3 2   1     3 2    2 2    1 2    0
  -------------- --- ----- ----- ----- ----- ------ ------ ------ ---

Plotting the points from the table and continuing along the *x*-axis
gives the shape of the sine function. See [\#](#).

<figure id="Figure_06_01_002">

</figure>

Notice how the sine values are positive between 0 and π, which
correspond to the values of the sine function in quadrants I and II on
the unit circle, and the sine values are negative between π and 2π,
which correspond to the values of the sine function in quadrants III and
IV on the unit circle. See [\#](#).

<figure id="Figure_06_01_003">

</figure>

Now let's take a similar look at the cosine function. Again, we can
create a table of values and use them to sketch a graph. [\#](#) lists
some of the values for the cosine function on a unit circle.

  ---------- --- ----- ----- ----- ----- ------- ------- ------- ----
  x          0   π 6   π 4   π 3   π 2   2π 3    3π 4    5π 6    π
  cos( x )   1   3 2   2 2   1 2   0     − 1 2   − 2 2   − 3 2   −1
  ---------- --- ----- ----- ----- ----- ------- ------- ------- ----

As with the sine function, we can plots points to create a graph of the
cosine function as in [\#](#).

<figure id="Figure_06_01_004">

</figure>

Because we can evaluate the sine and cosine of any real number, both of
these functions are defined for all real numbers. By thinking of the
sine and cosine values as coordinates of points on a unit circle, it
becomes clear that the range of both functions must be the interval \[
−1,1 \].

In both graphs, the shape of the graph repeats after 2π, which means the
functions are periodic with a period of 2π. A periodic function is a
function for which a specific horizontal shift, *P*, results in a
function equal to the original function: f( x+P )=f( x ) for all values
of x in the domain of f. When this occurs, we call the smallest such
horizontal shift with P\>0 the period of the function. [\#](#) shows
several periods of the sine and cosine functions.

<figure id="Figure_06_01_005">

</figure>

Looking again at the sine and cosine functions on a domain centered at
the *y*-axis helps reveal symmetries. As we can see in [\#](#), the sine
function is symmetric about the origin. Recall from [The Other
Trigonometric Functions](#) that we determined from the unit circle that
the sine function is an odd function because sin(−x)=−sinx. Now we can
clearly see this property from the graph.

<figure id="Figure_06_01_006">

</figure>

[\#](#) shows that the cosine function is symmetric about the *y*-axis.
Again, we determined that the cosine function is an even function. Now
we can see from the graph that cos(−x)=cosx.

<figure id="Figure_06_01_007">

</figure>

:::: {#fs-id1165135187674 .note}
::: title
Characteristics of Sine and Cosine Functions
:::

A General Note label

The sine and cosine functions have several distinct characteristics:

They are periodic functions with a period of

2

π

.

The domain of each function is

(

−

∞

,

∞

)

and the range is

\[

−

1

,

1

\]

.

The graph of

y

=

sin

x

is symmetric about the origin, because it is an odd function.

The graph of

y

=

cos

x

is symmetric about the

y

-axis, because it is an even function.
::::

# Investigating Sinusoidal Functions {#fs-id1165134032223}

As we can see, sine and cosine functions have a regular period and
range. If we watch ocean waves or ripples on a pond, we will see that
they resemble the sine or cosine functions. However, they are not
necessarily identical. Some are taller or longer than others. A function
that has the same general shape as a sine or cosine function is known as
a sinusoidal function. The general forms of sinusoidal functions are

$$\begin{array}{l}
{y = A\sin\left( {Bx - C} \right) + D} \\
\text{and} \\
{y = A\cos\left( {Bx - C} \right) + D}
\end{array}$$

## Determining the Period of Sinusoidal Functions {#fs-id1165135458566}

Looking at the forms of sinusoidal functions, we can see that they are
transformations of the sine and cosine functions. We can use what we
know about transformations to determine the period.

In the general formula, B is related to the period by P= 2π \| B \| . If
\| B \|\>1, then the period is less than 2π and the function undergoes a
horizontal compression, whereas if \| B \|\<1, then the period is
greater than 2π and the function undergoes a horizontal stretch. For
example, f(x)=sin( x ), B=1, so the period is 2π, which we knew. If
f(x)=sin( 2x ), then B=2, so the period is π and the graph is
compressed. If f(x)=sin( x 2 ), then B= 1 2 , so the period is 4π and
the graph is stretched. Notice in [\#](#) how the period is indirectly
related to \| B \|.

<figure id="Figure_06_01_008">

</figure>

:::: {#fs-id1165137697004 .note}
::: title
Period of Sinusoidal Functions
:::

A General note label

If we let C=0 and D=0 in the general form equations of the sine and
cosine functions, we obtain the forms

$$y = A\sin\left( {Bx} \right)$$

$$y = A\cos\left( {Bx} \right)$$

The period is 2π \| B \| .
::::

::: {#Example_06_01_01 .example}
Determine the period of the function f( x )=sin( π 6 x ).

Let's begin by comparing the equation to the general form y=Asin(Bx).

In the given equation, B= π 6 , so the period will be

$$\begin{array}{l}
\begin{array}{l}
 \\
{P = \frac{2\pi}{|B|}}
\end{array} \\
{= \frac{2\pi}{\frac{\pi}{6}}} \\
{= 2\pi \cdot \frac{6}{\pi}} \\
{= 12}
\end{array}$$
:::

:::: {#fs-id1165137465427 .note}
::: title
:::

Try IT Feature

Determine the period of the function g(x)=cos( x 3 ).

6π
::::

## Determining Amplitude {#fs-id1165135699141}

Returning to the general formula for a sinusoidal function, we have
analyzed how the variable B relates to the period. Now let's turn to the
variable A so we can analyze how it is related to the *amplitude*, or
greatest distance from rest. A represents the vertical stretch factor,
and its absolute value \| A \| is the amplitude. The local maxima will
be a distance \| A \| above the horizontal *midline* of the graph, which
is the line y=D; because D=0 in this case, the midline is the *x*-axis.
The local minima will be the same distance below the midline. If \| A
\|\>1, the function is stretched. For example, the amplitude of
f(x)=4sinx is twice the amplitude of f(x)=2sinx. If \| A \|\<1, the
function is compressed. [\#](#) compares several sine functions with
different amplitudes.

<figure id="Figure_06_01_009">

</figure>

:::: {#fs-id1165134284498 .note}
::: title
Amplitude of Sinusoidal Functions
:::

A General Note Label

If we let C=0 and D=0 in the general form equations of the sine and
cosine functions, we obtain the forms

$$y = A\sin\left( {Bx} \right)\text{~and~}y = A\cos\left( {Bx} \right)$$

The amplitude is \|A\|, which is the vertical height from the midline .
In addition, notice in the example that

$$|A|\text{~=~amplitude~=~}\frac{1}{2}\left| {\text{maximum~} - \text{~minimum}} \right|$$
::::

::: {#Example_06_01_02 .example}
What is the amplitude of the sinusoidal function f(x)=−4sin(x)? Is the
function stretched or compressed vertically?

Let's begin by comparing the function to the simplified form y=Asin(Bx).

In the given function, A=−4, so the amplitude is \| A \|=\| −4 \|=4. The
function is stretched.

The negative value of A results in a reflection across the *x*-axis of
the sine function, as shown in [\#](#).

<figure id="Figure_06_01_010">

</figure>
:::

:::: {#fs-id1165135471236 .note}
::: title
:::

Try IT Feature

What is the amplitude of the sinusoidal function f(x)= 1 2 sin(x)? Is
the function stretched or compressed vertically?

1 2 compressed
::::

# Analyzing Graphs of Variations of *y* = sin *x* and *y* = cos *x* {#fs-id1165137834807}

Now that we understand how A and B relate to the general form equation
for the sine and cosine functions, we will explore the variables C and
D. Recall the general form:

$$\begin{matrix}
{y = A\sin\left( {Bx - C} \right) + D\text{~and~}y = A\cos\left( {Bx - C} \right) + D} \\
{or} \\
{y = A\sin\left( {B\left( {x - \frac{C}{B}} \right)} \right) + D\text{~and~}y = A\cos\left( {B\left( {x - \frac{C}{B}} \right)} \right) + D}
\end{matrix}$$

The value C B for a sinusoidal function is called the *phase shift*, or
the horizontal displacement of the basic sine or cosine function. If
C\>0, the graph shifts to the right. If C\<0, the graph shifts to the
left. The greater the value of \| C \|, the more the graph is shifted.
[\#](#) shows that the graph of f(x)=sin( x−π ) shifts to the right by π
units, which is more than we see in the graph of f(x)=sin( x− π 4 ),
which shifts to the right by π 4 units.

<figure id="Figure_06_01_011">

</figure>

While C relates to the horizontal shift, D indicates the vertical shift
from the midline in the general formula for a sinusoidal function. See
[\#](#). The function y=cos( x )+D has its midline at y=D.

<figure id="Figure_06_01_012">

</figure>

Any value of D other than zero shifts the graph up or down. [\#](#)
compares f(x)=sin(x) with f(x)=sin(x)+2, which is shifted 2 units up on
a graph.

<figure id="Figure_06_01_013">

</figure>

:::: {#fs-id1165135571809 .note}
::: title
Variations of Sine and Cosine Functions
:::

A General Note label

Given an equation in the form f( x )=Asin( Bx−C )+D or f( x )=Acos( Bx−C
)+D, C B is the phase shift and D is the vertical shift.
::::

::: {#Example_06_01_03 .example}
Determine the direction and magnitude of the phase shift for f(x)=sin(
x+ π 6 )−2.

Let's begin by comparing the equation to the general form
y=Asin(Bx−C)+D.

In the given equation, notice that B=1 and C=− π 6 . So the phase shift
is

$$\begin{array}{r}
 \\
{\frac{C}{B} = - \frac{\frac{\pi}{6}}{1}} \\
{= - \frac{\pi}{6}}
\end{array}$$

or π 6 units to the left.

We must pay attention to the sign in the equation for the general form
of a sinusoidal function. The equation shows a minus sign before C.
Therefore f(x)=sin( x+ π 6 )−2 can be rewritten as f(x)=sin( x−( − π 6 )
)−2. If the value of C is negative, the shift is to the left.
:::

:::: {#fs-id1165137806038 .note}
::: title
:::

Try IT Feature

Determine the direction and magnitude of the phase shift for f(x)=3cos(
x− π 2 ).

π 2 ; right
::::

::: {#Example_06_01_04 .example}
Determine the direction and magnitude of the vertical shift for
f(x)=cos( x )−3.

Let's begin by comparing the equation to the general form
y=Acos(Bx−C)+D.

In the given equation, D=−3 so the shift is 3 units downward.
:::

:::: {#fs-id1165137742086 .note}
::: title
:::

Try IT Feature

Determine the direction and magnitude of the vertical shift for
f(x)=3sin( x )+2.

2 units up
::::

:::: {#fs-id1165137824883 .note}
::: title
:::

How to Feature

*Given a sinusoidal function in the form* f( x )=Asin( Bx−C )+D,
*identify the midline, amplitude, period, and phase shift.*

Determine the amplitude as

\|

A

\|

.

Determine the period as

P

=

2

π

\|

B

\|

.

Determine the phase shift as

C

B

.

Determine the midline as

y

=

D

.
::::

::: {#Example_06_01_05 .example}
Determine the midline, amplitude, period, and phase shift of the
function y=3sin(2x)+1.

Let's begin by comparing the equation to the general form
y=Asin(Bx−C)+D.

A=3, so the amplitude is \| A \|=3.

Next, B=2, so the period is P= 2π \| B \| = 2π 2 =π.

There is no added constant inside the parentheses, so C=0 and the phase
shift is C B = 0 2 =0.

Finally, D=1, so the midline is y=1.

Inspecting the graph, we can determine that the period is π, the midline
is y=1, and the amplitude is 3. See [\#](#).

<figure id="Figure_06_01_014">

</figure>
:::

:::: {#fs-id1165137447405 .note}
::: title
:::

Try IT Feature

Determine the midline, amplitude, period, and phase shift of the
function y= 1 2 cos( x 3 − π 3 ).

midline: y=0; amplitude: \| A \|= 1 2 ; period: P= 2π \| B \| =6π; phase
shift: C B =π
::::

::: {#Example_06_01_06 .example}
Determine the formula for the cosine function in [\#](#).

<figure id="Figure_06_01_015">

</figure>

To determine the equation, we need to identify each value in the general
form of a sinusoidal function.

$$\begin{array}{l}
{y = A\sin(Bx - C) + D} \\
{y = A\cos(Bx - C) + D}
\end{array}$$

The graph could represent either a sine or a cosine function that is
shifted and/or reflected. When x=0, the graph has an extreme point, (
0,0 ). Since the cosine function has an extreme point for x=0, let us
write our equation in terms of a cosine function.

Let's start with the midline. We can see that the graph rises and falls
an equal distance above and below y=0.5. This value, which is the
midline, is D in the equation, so D=0.5.

The greatest distance above and below the midline is the amplitude. The
maxima are 0.5 units above the midline and the minima are 0.5 units
below the midline. So \| A \|=0.5. Another way we could have determined
the amplitude is by recognizing that the difference between the height
of local maxima and minima is 1, so \| A \|= 1 2 =0.5. Also, the graph
is reflected about the *x*-axis so that A=−0.5.

The graph is not horizontally stretched or compressed, so B=1; and the
graph is not shifted horizontally, so C=0.

Putting this all together,

$$g(x) = - 0.5\cos(x) + 0.5$$
:::

:::: {#fs-id1165137702221 .note}
::: title
:::

Try IT Feature

Determine the formula for the sine function in [\#](#).

<figure id="Figure_06_01_016">

</figure>

f( x )=sin(x)+2
::::

::: {#Example_06_01_07 .example}
Determine the equation for the sinusoidal function in [\#](#).

<figure id="Figure_06_01_017">

</figure>

With the highest value at 1 and the lowest value at −5, the midline will
be halfway between at −2. So D=−2.

The distance from the midline to the highest or lowest value gives an
amplitude of \| A \|=3.

The period of the graph is 6, which can be measured from the peak at x=1
to the next peak at x=7, or from the distance between the lowest points.
Therefore, P= 2π \| B \| =6. Using the positive value for B, we find
that

$$B = \frac{2\pi}{P} = \frac{2\pi}{6} = \frac{\pi}{3}$$

So far, our equation is either y=3sin( π 3 x−C )−2 or y=3cos( π 3 x−C
)−2. For the shape and shift, we have more than one option. We could
write this as any one of the following:

a cosine shifted to the right

a negative cosine shifted to the left

a sine shifted to the left

a negative sine shifted to the right

Choosing to use the cosine function, we observe that the peak, which
would normally be at x=0, is at x=1, and given the horizontal
compression factor of π3, we get C=1·π3=π3.

While any of these would be correct, the cosine shifts are easier to
work with than the sine shifts in this case because they involve integer
values. So our function becomes

$$y = 3\cos\left( {\frac{\pi}{3}x - \frac{\pi}{3}} \right) - 2\text{~or~}y = - 3\cos\left( {\frac{\pi}{3}x + \frac{2\pi}{3}} \right) - 2$$

Again, these functions are equivalent, so both yield the same graph.
:::

:::: {#fs-id1165137805588 .note}
::: title
:::

Try IT Feature

Write a formula for the function graphed in [\#](#).

<figure id="Figure_06_01_018">

</figure>

two possibilities: y=4sin( π 5 x− π 5 )+4 or y=−4sin( π 5 x+ 4π 5 )+4
::::

# Graphing Variations of *y* = sin *x* and *y* = cos *x* {#fs-id1165137735424}

Throughout this section, we have learned about types of variations of
sine and cosine functions and used that information to write equations
from graphs. Now we can use the same information to create graphs from
equations.

Instead of focusing on the general form equations

$$y = A\sin\left( {Bx - C} \right) + D\text{~and~}y = A\cos\left( {Bx - C} \right) + D,$$

we will let C=0 and D=0 and work with a simplified form of the equations
in the following examples.

:::: {#fs-id1165135380117 .note}
::: title
:::

How To Feature

*Given the function y=Asin( Bx ), sketch its graph.*

Identify the amplitude,

\|

A

\|

.

Identify the period,

P

=

2

π

\|

B

\|

.

Start at the origin, with the function increasing to the right if

A

is positive or decreasing if

A

is negative.

At

x

=

π

2

\|

B

\|

there is a local maximum for

A

\>

0

or a minimum for

A

\<

0

,

with

y

=

A

.

The curve returns to the

x

-axis at

x

=

π

\|

B

\|

.

There is a local minimum for

A

\>

0

(maximum for

A

\<

0

) at

x

=

3

π

2

\|

B

\|

with

y

=

--

A

.

The curve returns again to the

x

-axis at

x

=

2

π

\|

B

\|

.
::::

::: {#Example_06_01_08 .example}
Sketch a graph of f( x )=−2sin( πx 2 ).

Let's begin by comparing the equation to the form y=Asin(Bx).

Step 1.

We can see from the equation that

A

=

−

2

,

so the amplitude is 2.

$$|A| = 2$$

Step 2.

The equation shows that

B

=

π

2

,

so the period is

$$\begin{array}{l}
{P = \frac{2\pi}{\frac{\pi}{2}}} \\
{= 2\pi \cdot \frac{2}{\pi}} \\
{= 4}
\end{array}$$

Step 3.

Because

A

is negative, the graph descends as we move to the right of the origin.

Step 4--7.

The

x

-intercepts are at the beginning of one period,

x

=

0

,

the horizontal midpoints are at

x

=

2

and at the end of one period at

x

=

4\.

The quarter points include the minimum at x=1 and the maximum at x=3. A
local minimum will occur 2 units below the midline, at x=1, and a local
maximum will occur at 2 units above the midline, at x=3. [\#](#) shows
the graph of the function.

<figure id="Figure_06_01_019">

</figure>
:::

:::: {#fs-id1165137539724 .note}
::: title
:::

Try IT Feature

Sketch a graph of g( x )=−0.8cos( 2x ). Determine the midline,
amplitude, period, and phase shift.

midline: y=0; amplitude: \| A \|=0.8; period: P= 2π \| B \| =π; phase
shift: C B =0 or none
::::

:::: {#fs-id1165137425929 .note}
::: title
:::

How to Feature

*Given a sinusoidal function with a phase shift and a vertical shift,
sketch its graph.*

Express the function in the general form

y

=

A

sin

(

B

x

−

C

)

\+

D

 or 

y

=

A

cos

(

B

x

−

C

)

\+

D

.

Identify the amplitude,

\|

A

\|

.

Identify the period,

P

=

2

π

\|

B

\|

.

Identify the phase shift,

C

B

.

Draw the graph of

f

(

x

)

=

A

sin

(

B

x

)

shifted to the right or left by

C

B

and up or down by

D

.
::::

::: {#Example_06_01_09 .example}
Sketch a graph of f( x )=3sin( π 4 x− π 4 ).

Step 1.

The function is already written in general form:

f

(

x

)

=

3

sin

(

π

4

x

−

π

4

)

.

This graph will have the shape of a

sine function

, starting at the midline and increasing to the right.

Step 2.

\|

A

\|

=

\|

3

\|

=

3\.

The amplitude is 3.

Step 3.

Since

\|

B

\|

=

\|

π

4

\|

=

π

4

,

we determine the period as follows.

$$P = \frac{2\pi}{|B|} = \frac{2\pi}{\frac{\pi}{4}} = 2\pi \cdot \frac{4}{\pi} = 8$$

The period is 8.

Step 4.

Since

C

=

π

4

,

the phase shift is

$$\frac{C}{B} = \frac{\frac{\pi}{4}}{\frac{\pi}{4}} = 1.$$

The phase shift is 1 unit.

Step 5.

shows the graph of the function.

<figure id="Figure_06_01_021">

</figure>
:::

:::: {#fs-id1165135181399 .note}
::: title
:::

Try IT Feature

Draw a graph of g(x)=−2cos( π 3 x+ π 6 ). Determine the midline,
amplitude, period, and phase shift.

midline: y=0; amplitude: \| A \|=2; period: P= 2π \| B \| =6; phase
shift: C B =− 1 2
::::

::: {#Example_06_01_10 .example}
Given y=−2cos( π 2 x+π )+3, determine the amplitude, period, phase
shift, and vertical shift. Then graph the function.

Begin by comparing the equation to the general form and use the steps
outlined in [\#](#).

$$y = A\cos\left( {Bx - C} \right) + D$$

Step 1.

The function is already written in general form.

Step 2.

Since

A

=

−

2

,

the amplitude is

\|

A

\|

=

2\.

Step 3.

\|

B

\|

=

π

2

,

so the period is

P

=

2

π

\|

B

\|

=

2

π

π

2

=

2

π

⋅

2

π

=

4\.

The period is 4.

Step 4.

C

=

−

π

,

so we calculate the phase shift as

C

B

=

−

π

,

π

2

=

−

π

⋅

2

π

=

−

2\.

The phase shift is

−

2\.

Step 5.

D

=

3

,

so the midline is

y

=

3

, 

and the vertical shift is up 3.

Since A is negative, the graph of the cosine function has been reflected
about the *x*-axis.

[\#](#) shows one cycle of the graph of the function.

<figure id="Figure_06_01_028">

</figure>
:::

# Using Transformations of Sine and Cosine Functions {#fs-id1165137939840}

We can use the transformations of sine and cosine functions in numerous
applications. As mentioned at the beginning of the chapter, circular
motion can be modeled using either the sine or cosine function.

::: {#Example_06_01_11 .example}
A point rotates around a circle of radius 3 centered at the origin.
Sketch a graph of the *y*-coordinate of the point as a function of the
angle of rotation.

Recall that, for a point on a circle of radius *r*, the *y*-coordinate
of the point is y=rsin(x), so in this case, we get the equation
y(x)=3sin(x). The constant 3 causes a vertical stretch of the *y*-values
of the function by a factor of 3, which we can see in the graph in
[\#](#).

<figure id="Figure_06_01_023">

</figure>

Notice that the period of the function is still 2π; as we travel around
the circle, we return to the point ( 3,0 ) for x=2π,4π,6π,\... Because
the outputs of the graph will now oscillate between --3 and 3, the
amplitude of the sine wave is 3.
:::

:::: {#fs-id1165135319496 .note}
::: title
:::

Try IT Feature

What is the amplitude of the function f(x)=7cos(x)? Sketch a graph of
this function.

7
::::

::: {#Example_06_01_12 .example}
A circle with radius 3 ft is mounted with its center 4 ft off the
ground. The point closest to the ground is labeled *P*, as shown in
[\#](#). Sketch a graph of the height above the ground of the point P as
the circle is rotated; then find a function that gives the height in
terms of the angle of rotation.

<figure id="Figure_06_01_025">

</figure>

Sketching the height, we note that it will start 1 ft above the ground,
then increase up to 7 ft above the ground, and continue to oscillate 3
ft above and below the center value of 4 ft, as shown in [\#](#).

<figure id="Figure_06_01_026">

</figure>

Although we could use a transformation of either the sine or cosine
function, we start by looking for characteristics that would make one
function easier to use than the other. Let's use a cosine function
because it starts at the highest or lowest value, while a sine function
starts at the middle value. A standard cosine starts at the highest
value, and this graph starts at the lowest value, so we need to
incorporate a vertical reflection.

Second, we see that the graph oscillates 3 above and below the center,
while a basic cosine has an amplitude of 1, so this graph has been
vertically stretched by 3, as in the last example.

Finally, to move the center of the circle up to a height of 4, the graph
has been vertically shifted up by 4. Putting these transformations
together, we find that

$$y = - 3\cos(x) + 4$$
:::

:::: {#fs-id1165137692182 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It Feature

A weight is attached to a spring that is then hung from a board, as
shown in [\#](#). As the spring oscillates up and down, the position y
of the weight relative to the board ranges from --1 in. (at time x=0) to
--7 in. (at time x=π) below the board. Assume the position of y is given
as a sinusoidal function of x. Sketch a graph of the function, and then
find a cosine function that gives the position y in terms of x.

<figure id="Figure_06_01_029">

</figure>

y=3cos( x )−4
::::

::: {#Example_06_01_13 .example}
The London Eye is a huge Ferris wheel with a diameter of 135 meters (443
feet). It completes one rotation every 30 minutes. Riders board from a
platform 2 meters above the ground. Express a rider's height above
ground as a function of time in minutes.

With a diameter of 135 m, the wheel has a radius of 67.5 m. The height
will oscillate with amplitude 67.5 m above and below the center.

Passengers board 2 m above ground level, so the center of the wheel must
be located 67.5+2=69.5 m above ground level. The midline of the
oscillation will be at 69.5 m.

The wheel takes 30 minutes to complete 1 revolution, so the height will
oscillate with a period of 30 minutes.

Lastly, because the rider boards at the lowest point, the height will
start at the smallest value and increase, following the shape of a
vertically reflected cosine curve.

Amplitude:

67.5,

so

A

=

67.5

Midline:

69.5,

so

D

=

69.5

Period:

30,

so

B

=

2

π

30

=

π

15

Shape:

−cos

(

t

)

An equation for the rider's height would be

$$y = - 67.5\cos\left( {\frac{\pi}{15}t} \right) + 69.5$$

where t is in minutes and y is measured in meters.
:::

:::: {#fs-id1165137540365 .note}
::: title
:::

Media Feature Label

Access these online resources for additional instruction and practice
with graphs of sine and cosine functions.

Amplitude and Period of Sine and Cosine

Translations of Sine and Cosine

Graphing Sine and Cosine Transformations

Graphing the Sine Function
::::

# Key Equations {#fs-id1165137574576}

  ---------------------- ---------------------------------------------
  Sinusoidal functions   f( x )=Asin( Bx−C )+D f( x )=Acos( Bx−C )+D
  ---------------------- ---------------------------------------------

# Key Concepts {#fs-id1165137540392}

Periodic functions repeat after a given value. The smallest such value
is the period. The basic sine and cosine functions have a period of

2

π

.

The function

sin

x

is odd, so its graph is symmetric about the origin. The function

cos

x

is even, so its graph is symmetric about the

y

-axis.

The graph of a sinusoidal function has the same general shape as a sine
or cosine function.

In the general formula for a sinusoidal function, the period is

P

=

2

π

\|

B

\|

.

See

.

In the general formula for a sinusoidal function,

\|

A

\|

represents amplitude. If

\|

A

\|

\>

1

,

the function is stretched, whereas if

\|

A

\|

\<

1

,

the function is compressed. See

.

The value

C

B

in the general formula for a sinusoidal function indicates the phase
shift. See

.

The value

D

in the general formula for a sinusoidal function indicates the vertical
shift from the midline. See

.

Combinations of variations of sinusoidal functions can be detected from
an equation. See

.

The equation for a sinusoidal function can be determined from a graph.
See

and

.

A function can be graphed by identifying its amplitude and period. See

and

.

A function can also be graphed by identifying its amplitude, period,
phase shift, and horizontal shift. See

.

Sinusoidal functions can be used to solve real-world problems. See

,

, and

.

# Section Exercises {#fs-id1165137842570}

## Verbal {#fs-id1165137475812}

Why are the sine and cosine functions called periodic functions?

The sine and cosine functions have the property that f( x+P )=f( x ) for
a certain P. This means that the function values repeat for every P
units on the *x*-axis.

How does the graph of y=sinx compare with the graph of y=cosx? Explain
how you could horizontally translate the graph of y=sinx to obtain
y=cosx.

For the equation Acos(Bx+C)+D, what constants affect the range of the
function and how do they affect the range?

The absolute value of the constant A (amplitude) increases the total
range and the constant D (vertical shift) shifts the graph vertically.

How does the range of a translated sine function relate to the equation
y=Asin(Bx+C)+D?

How can the unit circle be used to construct the graph of f(t)=sint?

At the point where the terminal side of t intersects the unit circle,
you can determine that the sint equals the *y*-coordinate of the point.

## Graphical {#fs-id1165137663688}

For the following exercises, graph two full periods of each function and
state the amplitude, period, and midline. State the maximum and minimum
*y*-values and their corresponding *x*-values on one period for x\>0.
Round answers to two decimal places if necessary.

f(x)=2sinx

f(x)= 2 3 cosx

amplitude: 2 3 ; period: 2π; midline: y=0; maximum: y= 2 3 occurs at
x=2π; minimum: y=− 2 3 occurs at x=π; for one period, the graph starts
at 0 and ends at 2π

f(x)=−3sin x

f(x)=4sinx

amplitude: 4; period: 2π; midline: y=0; maximum y=4 occurs at x= π 2 ;
minimum: y=−4 occurs at x= 3π 2 ; one full period occurs from x=0 to
x=2π

f(x)=2cosx

f( x )=cos( 2x )

amplitude: 1; period: π; midline: y=0; maximum: y=1 occurs at x=π;
minimum: y=−1 occurs at x= π 2 ; one full period is graphed from x=0 to
x=π

f(x)=2sin( 1 2 x )

f(x)=4cos(πx)

amplitude: 4; period: 2; midline: y=0; maximum: y=4 occurs at x=2;
minimum: y=−4 occurs at x=1

f(x)=3cos( 6 5 x )

y=3sin(8(x+4))+5

amplitude: 3; period: π 4 ; midline: y=5; maximum: y=8 occurs at x=0.12;
minimum: y=2 occurs at x=0.516; horizontal shift: −4; vertical
translation 5; one period occurs from x=0 to x= π 4

y=2sin(3x−21)+4

y=5sin(5x+20)−2

amplitude: 5; period: 2π 5 ; midline: y=−2; maximum: y=3 occurs at
x=0.08; minimum: y=−7 occurs at x=0.71; phase shift: −4; vertical
translation: −2; one full period can be graphed on x=0 to x= 2π 5

For the following exercises, graph one full period of each function,
starting at x=0. For each function, state the amplitude, period, and
midline. State the maximum and minimum *y*-values and their
corresponding *x*-values on one period for x\>0. State the phase shift
and vertical translation, if applicable. Round answers to two decimal
places if necessary.

f( t )=2sin( t− 5π 6 )

f(t)=−cos( t+ π 3 )+1

amplitude: 1 ; period: 2π; midline: y=1; maximum: y=2 occurs at x=2.09;
minimum: y=0 occurs at t=5.24; phase shift: − π 3 ; vertical
translation: 1; one full period is from t=0 to t=2π

f( t )=4cos( 2( t+ π 4 ) )−3

f( t )=−sin( 1 2 t+ 5π 3 )

amplitude: 1; period: 4π; midline: y=0; maximum: y=1 occurs at t=11.52;
minimum: y=−1 occurs at t=5.24; phase shift: − 10π 3 ; vertical shift: 0

f( x )=4sin( π 2 ( x−3 ) )+7

Determine the amplitude, midline, period, and an equation involving the
sine function for the graph shown in [\#](#).

<figure id="Figure_06_01_218">

</figure>

amplitude: 2; midline: y=−3; period: 4; equation: f(x)=2sin( π 2 x )−3

Determine the amplitude, period, midline, and an equation involving
cosine for the graph shown in [\#](#).

<figure id="Figure_06_01_219">

</figure>

Determine the amplitude, period, midline, and an equation involving
cosine for the graph shown in [\#](#).

<figure id="Figure_06_01_220">

</figure>

amplitude: 2; period: 5; midline: y=3; equation: f(x)=−2cos( 2π 5 x )+3

Determine the amplitude, period, midline, and an equation involving sine
for the graph shown in [\#](#).

<figure id="Figure_06_01_221">

</figure>

Determine the amplitude, period, midline, and an equation involving
cosine for the graph shown in [\#](#).

<figure id="Figure_06_01_222">

</figure>

amplitude: 4; period: 2; midline: y=0; equation: f(x)=−4cos( π( x− π 2 )
)

Determine the amplitude, period, midline, and an equation involving sine
for the graph shown in [\#](#).

<figure id="Figure_06_01_223">

</figure>

Determine the amplitude, period, midline, and an equation involving
cosine for the graph shown in [\#](#).

<figure id="Figure_06_01_224">

</figure>

amplitude: 2; period: 2; midline y=1; equation: f( x )=2cos( πx )+1

Determine the amplitude, period, midline, and an equation involving sine
for the graph shown in [\#](#).

<figure id="Figure_06_01_225">

</figure>

## Algebraic {#fs-id1165134043561}

For the following exercises, let f(x)=sinx.

On \[ 0,2π ), solve f( x )=0.

0,π

On \[ 0,2π ), solve f( x )= 1 2 .

Evaluate f( π 2 ).

sin(π2)=1

On \[0,2π),f(x)= 2 2 . Find all values of x.

On \[ 0,2π ), the maximum value(s) of the function occur(s) at what
*x*-value(s)?

π2

On \[ 0,2π ), the minimum value(s) of the function occur(s) at what
*x*-value(s)?

Show that f(−x)=−f(x). This means that f(x)=sinx is an odd function and
possesses symmetry with respect to \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_.

f(x)=sinx is symmetric

For the following exercises, let f(x)=cosx.

On \[ 0,2π ), solve the equation f(x)=cosx=0.

On \[ 0,2π ), solve f(x)= 1 2 .

π3,5π3

On \[ 0,2π ), find the *x*-intercepts of f(x)=cosx.

On \[ 0,2π ), find the *x*-values at which the function has a maximum or
minimum value.

Maximum: 1 at x= 0 ; minimum: -1 at x= π

On \[ 0,2π ), solve the equation f(x)= 3 2 .

## Technology {#fs-id1165137638455}

Graph h(x)=x+sinx on \[ 0,2π \]. Explain why the graph appears as it
does.

A linear function is added to a periodic sine function. The graph does
not have an amplitude because as the linear function increases without
bound the combined function h(x)=x+sinx will increase without bound as
well. The graph is bounded between the graphs of y=x+1 and y=x-1 because
sine oscillates between −1 and 1.

Graph h(x)=x+sinx on \[ −100,100 \]. Did the graph appear as predicted
in the previous exercise?

Graph f(x)=xsinx on \[ 0,2π \] and verbalize how the graph varies from
the graph of f(x)=sinx.

There is no amplitude because the function is not bounded.

Graph f(x)=xsinx on the window \[ −10,10 \] and explain what the graph
shows.

Graph f(x)= sinx x on the window \[ −5π,5π \] and explain what the graph
shows.

The graph is symmetric with respect to the y-axis and there is no
amplitude because the function's bounds decrease as \|x\| grows. There
appears to be a horizontal asymptote at y=0 .

## Real-World Applications {#fs-id1165135333770}

A Ferris wheel is 25 meters in diameter and boarded from a platform that
is 1 meter above the ground. The six o'clock position on the Ferris
wheel is level with the loading platform. The wheel completes 1 full
revolution in 10 minutes. The function h( t ) gives a person's height in
meters above the ground *t* minutes after the wheel begins to turn.

ⓐ

Find the amplitude, midline, and period of

h

(

t

)

.

ⓑ

Find a formula for the height function

h

(

t

)

.

ⓒ

How high off the ground is a person after 5 minutes?

# 

amplitude

the vertical height of a function; the constant

A

appearing in the definition of a sinusoidal function

midline

the horizontal line

y

=

D

,

where

D

appears in the general form of a sinusoidal function

periodic function

a function

f

(

x

)

that satisfies

f

(

x

\+

P

)

=

f

(

x

)

for a specific constant

P

and any value of

x

phase shift

the horizontal displacement of the basic sine or cosine function; the
constant

C

B

sinusoidal function

any function that can be expressed in the form

f

(

x

)

=

A

sin

(

B

x

−

C

)

\+

D

or

f

(

x

)

=

A

cos

(

B

x

−

C

)

\+

D
