m49389

> In this section, you will:
>
> Analyze the graph of  y=tan x.
>
> Graph variations of  y=tan x.
>
> Analyze the graphs of  y=sec x  and  y=csc x.
>
> Graph variations of  y=sec x  and  y=csc x.
>
> Analyze the graph of  y=cot x.
>
> Graph variations of  y=cot x.

cb7bac04-92bc-42cc-962f-4698fdaaab60

We know the tangent function can be used to find distances, such as the
height of a building, mountain, or flagpole. But what if we want to
measure repeated occurrences of distance? Imagine, for example, a fire
truck parked next to a warehouse. The rotating light from the truck
would travel across the wall of the warehouse in regular intervals. If
the input is time, the output would be the distance the beam of light
travels. The beam of light would repeat the distance at regular
intervals. The tangent function can be used to approximate this
distance. Asymptotes would be needed to illustrate the repeated cycles
when the beam runs parallel to the wall because, seemingly, the beam of
light could appear to extend forever. The graph of the tangent function
would clearly illustrate the repeated intervals. In this section, we
will explore the graphs of the tangent and other trigonometric
functions.

# Analyzing the Graph of *y* = tan *x* {#fs-id1321556}

We will begin with the graph of the tangent function, plotting points as
we did for the sine and cosine functions. Recall that

$$\tan\mspace{9mu} x = \frac{\sin\mspace{9mu} x}{\cos\mspace{9mu} x}$$

The period of the tangent function is π because the graph repeats itself
on intervals of kπ where k is a constant. If we graph the tangent
function on − π 2 to π 2 , we can see the behavior of the graph on one
complete cycle. If we look at any larger interval, we will see that the
characteristics of the graph repeat.

We can determine whether tangent is an odd or even function by using the
definition of tangent.

$$\begin{array}{ll}
{\tan(-x) = \frac{\sin(-x)}{\cos(-x)}} & {\begin{array}{lll}
 & & 
\end{array}\text{Definition~of~tangent}.} \\
{\text{~~~~~~~~~~~~~} = \frac{- \sin\mspace{9mu} x}{\cos\mspace{9mu} x}} & {\begin{array}{lll}
 & & 
\end{array}\text{Sine~is~an~odd~function,~cosine~is~even}.} \\
{\text{~~~~~~~~~~~~~} = - \frac{\sin\; x}{\cos\; x}} & {\begin{array}{lll}
 & & 
\end{array}\text{The~quotient~of~an~odd~and~an~even~function~is~odd}.} \\
{\text{~~~~~~~~~~~~~} = - \tan\; x} & {\begin{array}{lll}
 & & 
\end{array}\text{Definition~of~tangent}.}
\end{array}$$

Therefore, tangent is an odd function. We can further analyze the
graphical behavior of the tangent function by looking at values for some
of the special angles, as listed in [\#](#).

  -------------- ----------- ------- ------- ------- --- ----- ----- ----- -----------
  *x*            − π 2       − π 3   − π 4   − π 6   0   π 6   π 4   π 3   π 2
  *tan( x )*     undefined   − 3     --1     − 3 3   0   3 3   1     3     undefined
  -------------- ----------- ------- ------- ------- --- ----- ----- ----- -----------

These points will help us draw our graph, but we need to determine how
the graph behaves where it is undefined. If we look more closely at
values when π 3 \<x\< π 2 , we can use a table to look for a trend.
Because π 3 ≈1.05 and π 2 ≈1.57, we will evaluate x at radian measures
1.05\<x\<1.57 as shown in [\#](#).

  ---------- ----- ------ ------ ------
  *x*        1.3   1.5    1.55   1.56
  *tanx*     3.6   14.1   48.1   92.6
  ---------- ----- ------ ------ ------

As x approaches π 2 , the outputs of the function get larger and larger.
Because y=tanx is an odd function, we see the corresponding table of
negative values in [\#](#).

  ---------- ------ ------- ------- -------
  *x*        −1.3   −1.5    −1.55   −1.56
  *tanx*     −3.6   −14.1   −48.1   −92.6
  ---------- ------ ------- ------- -------

We can see that, as x approaches − π 2 , the outputs get smaller and
smaller. Remember that there are some values of x for which cosx=0. For
example, cos( π 2 )=0 and cos( 3π 2 )=0. At these values, the tangent
function is undefined, so the graph of y=tanx has discontinuities at x=
π 2  and  3π 2 . At these values, the graph of the tangent has vertical
asymptotes. [\#](#) represents the graph of y=tanx. The tangent is
positive from 0 to π 2 and from π to 3π 2 , corresponding to quadrants I
and III of the unit circle.

<figure id="Figure_06_02_001">

</figure>

# Graphing Variations of *y* = tan *x* {#fs-id1678025}

As with the sine and cosine functions, the tangent function can be
described by a general equation.

$$y = A\tan(Bx)$$

We can identify horizontal and vertical stretches and compressions using
values of A and B. The horizontal stretch can typically be determined
from the period of the graph. With tangent graphs, it is often necessary
to determine a vertical stretch using a point on the graph.

Because there are no maximum or minimum values of a tangent function,
the term *amplitude* cannot be interpreted as it is for the sine and
cosine functions. Instead, we will use the phrase
*stretching/compressing factor* when referring to the constant A.

:::: {#fs-id1409849 .note}
::: title
Features of the Graph of *y* = *A*tan(*Bx*)
:::

A General note label

The stretching factor is

\|

A

\|

.

The period is

P

=

π

\|

B

\|

.

The domain is all real numbers

x

,

where

x

≠

π

2

\|

B

\|

\+

π

\|

B

\|

k

such that

k

is an integer.

The range is

(

−∞

,

∞

)

.

The asymptotes occur at

x

=

π

2

\|

B

\|

\+

π

\|

B

\|

k

,

where

k

is an integer.

y

=

A

tan

(

B

x

)

is an odd function.
::::

## Graphing One Period of a Stretched or Compressed Tangent Function {#fs-id1430247}

We can use what we know about the properties of the tangent function to
quickly sketch a graph of any stretched and/or compressed tangent
function of the form f(x)=Atan(Bx). We focus on a single period of the
function including the origin, because the periodic property enables us
to extend the graph to the rest of the function's domain if we wish. Our
limited domain is then the interval ( − P 2 , P 2 ) and the graph has
vertical asymptotes at ± P 2 where P= π B . On ( − π 2 , π 2 ), the
graph will come up from the left asymptote at x=− π 2 , cross through
the origin, and continue to increase as it approaches the right
asymptote at x= π 2 . To make the function approach the asymptotes at
the correct rate, we also need to set the vertical scale by actually
evaluating the function for at least one point that the graph will pass
through. For example, we can use

$$f\left( \frac{P}{4} \right) = A\tan\left( {B\frac{P}{4}} \right) = A\tan\left( {B\frac{\pi}{4B}} \right) = A$$

because tan( π 4 )=1.

:::: {#fs-id1644376 .note}
::: title
:::

How To Feature

*Given the function f(x)=Atan(Bx), graph one period.*

Identify the stretching factor,

\|

A

\|

.

Identify

B

and determine the period,

P

=

π

\|

B

\|

.

Draw vertical asymptotes at

x

=

−

P

2

and

x

=

P

2

.

For

A

B

\>

0

,

the graph approaches the left asymptote at negative output values and
the right asymptote at positive output values (reverse for

A

B

\<

0

).

Plot reference points at

(

P

4

,

A

)

,

(

0

,

0

)

,

and

(

−

P

4

,−

A

)

,

and draw the graph through these points.
::::

::: {#Example_06_02_01 .example}
Sketch a graph of one period of the function y=0.5tan( π 2 x ).

First, we identify A and B.

Because A=0.5 and B= π 2 , we can find the stretching/compressing factor
and period. The period is π π 2 =2, so the asymptotes are at x=±1. At a
quarter period from the origin, we have

$$\begin{array}{l}
{f(0.5) = 0.5\tan\left( \frac{0.5\pi}{2} \right)} \\
{= 0.5\tan\left( \frac{\pi}{4} \right)} \\
{= 0.5}
\end{array}$$

This means the curve must pass through the points ( 0.5,0.5 ), ( 0,0 ),
and ( −0.5,−0.5 ). The only inflection point is at the origin. [\#](#)
shows the graph of one period of the function.

<figure id="Figure_06_02_003">

</figure>
:::

:::: {#fs-id1009376 .note}
::: title
:::

Try IT Feature

Sketch a graph of f(x)=3tan( π 6 x ).
::::

## Graphing One Period of a Shifted Tangent Function {#fs-id1464435}

Now that we can graph a tangent function that is stretched or
compressed, we will add a vertical and/or horizontal (or phase) shift.
In this case, we add C and D to the general form of the tangent
function.

$$f(x) = A\tan(Bx - C) + D$$

The graph of a transformed tangent function is different from the basic
tangent function tanx in several ways:

:::: {#eip-87 .note}
::: title
Features of the Graph of *y* = *A*tan(*Bx*−*C*)+*D*
:::

The stretching factor is

\|

A

\|

.

The period is

π

\|

B

\|

.

The domain is

x

≠

C

B

\+

π

2

\|

B

\|

k

,

where

k

is an integer.

The range is

(

−∞

,

∞

)

.

The vertical asymptotes occur at

x

=

C

B

\+

π

2

\|

B

\|

k

,

where

k

is an odd integer.

There is no amplitude.
::::

:::: {#fs-id1665485 .note}
::: title
:::

How To Feature

*Given the function y=Atan(Bx−C)+D, sketch the graph of one period.*

Express the function given in the form

y

=

A

tan

(

B

x

−

C

)

\+

D

.

Identify the

stretching/compressing factor

,

\|

A

\|

.

Identify

B

and determine the period,

P

=

π

\|

B

\|

.

Identify

C

and determine the phase shift,

C

B

.

Draw the graph of

y

=

A

tan

(

B

x

)

shifted to the right by

C

B

and up by

D

.

Sketch the vertical asymptotes, which occur at

x

=

C

B

\+

π

2

\|

B

\|

k

,

where

k

is an odd integer.

Plot any three reference points and draw the graph through these points.
::::

::: {#Example_06_02_02 .example}
Graph one period of the function y=−2tan(πx+π)−1.

Step 1.

The function is already written in the form

y

=

A

tan

(

B

x

−

C

)

\+

D

.

Step 2.

A

=

−2

,

so the stretching factor is

\|

A

\|

=

2\.

Step 3.

B

=

π

,

so the period is

P

=

π

\|

B

\|

=

π

π

=

1\.

Step 4.

C

=

−

π

,

so the phase shift is

C

B

=

−

π

π

=

−1.

Step 5-7.

The asymptotes are at

x

=

−

3

2

and

x

=

−

1

2

and the three recommended reference points are

(

−1.25

,

1

)

,

(

−1,

−1

)

,

and

(

−0.75,

−3

)

.

The graph is shown in

.

<figure id="Figure_06_02_005">

</figure>

Note that this is a decreasing function because A\<0.
:::

:::: {#fs-id1586707 .note}
::: title
:::

Try IT Feature

How would the graph in [\#](#) look different if we made A=2 instead of
−2?

It would be reflected across the line y=−1, becoming an increasing
function.
::::

:::: {#fs-id672550 .note}
::: title
:::

How To Feature

*Given the graph of a tangent function, identify horizontal and vertical
stretches.*

Find the period

P

from the spacing between successive vertical asymptotes or

x

-intercepts.

Write

f

(

x

)

=

A

tan

(

π

P

x

)

.

Determine a convenient point

(

x

,

f

(

x

)

)

on the given graph and use it to determine

A

.
::::

::: {#Example_06_02_03 .example}
Find a formula for the function graphed in [\#](#).

<figure id="Figure_06_02_006">

</figure>

The graph has the shape of a tangent function.

Step 1.

One cycle extends from --4 to 4, so the period is

P

=

8\.

Since

P

=

π

\|

B

\|

,

we have

B

=

π

P

=

π

8

.

Step 2.

The equation must have the form

f

(

x

)

=

A

tan

(

π

8

x

)

.

Step 3.

To find the vertical stretch

A

,

we can use the point

(

2

,

2

)

.

$$2 = A\tan\left( {\frac{\pi}{8} \cdot 2} \right) = A\tan\left( \frac{\pi}{4} \right)$$

Because tan( π 4 )=1, A=2.

This function would have a formula f(x)=2tan( π 8 x ).
:::

:::: {#fs-id1655580 .note}
::: title
:::

Try IT Feature

Find a formula for the function in [\#](#).

<figure id="Figure_06_02_007">

</figure>

g(x)=4tan(2x)
::::

# Analyzing the Graphs of *y* = sec *x* and *y* = csc*x* {#fs-id1653007}

The secant was defined by the reciprocal identity secx= 1 cosx . Notice
that the function is undefined when the cosine is 0, leading to vertical
asymptotes at π 2 , 3π 2 , etc. Because the cosine is never more than 1
in absolute value, the secant, being the reciprocal, will never be less
than 1 in absolute value.

We can graph y=secx by observing the graph of the cosine function
because these two functions are reciprocals of one another. See [\#](#).
The graph of the cosine is shown as a dashed orange wave so we can see
the relationship. Where the graph of the cosine function decreases, the
graph of the secant function increases. Where the graph of the cosine
function increases, the graph of the secant function decreases. When the
cosine function is zero, the secant is undefined.

The secant graph has vertical asymptotes at each value of x where the
cosine graph crosses the *x*-axis; we show these in the graph below with
dashed vertical lines, but will not show all the asymptotes explicitly
on all later graphs involving the secant and cosecant.

Note that, because cosine is an even function, secant is also an even
function. That is, sec( −x )=secx.

<figure id="Figure_06_02_008">

</figure>

As we did for the tangent function, we will again refer to the constant
\| A \| as the stretching factor, not the amplitude.

:::: {#fs-id1700128 .note}
::: title
Features of the Graph of *y* = *A*sec(*Bx*)
:::

A General Note Label

The stretching factor is

\|

A

\|

.

The period is

2

π

\|

B

\|

.

The domain is

x

≠

π

2

\|

B

\|

k

,

where

k

is an odd integer.

The range is

(

−

∞

,

−

\|

A

\|

\]

∪

\[

\|

A

\|

,

∞

)

.

The vertical asymptotes occur at

x

=

π

2

\|

B

\|

k

,

where

k

is an odd integer.

There is no amplitude.

y

=

A

sec

(

B

x

)

is an even function because cosine is an even function.
::::

Similar to the secant, the cosecant is defined by the reciprocal
identity cscx= 1 sinx . Notice that the function is undefined when the
sine is 0, leading to a vertical asymptote in the graph at 0, π, etc.
Since the sine is never more than 1 in absolute value, the cosecant,
being the reciprocal, will never be less than 1 in absolute value.

We can graph y=cscx by observing the graph of the sine function because
these two functions are reciprocals of one another. See [\#](#). The
graph of sine is shown as a dashed orange wave so we can see the
relationship. Where the graph of the sine function decreases, the graph
of the cosecant function increases. Where the graph of the sine function
increases, the graph of the cosecant function decreases.

The cosecant graph has vertical asymptotes at each value of x where the
sine graph crosses the *x*-axis; we show these in the graph below with
dashed vertical lines.

Note that, since sine is an odd function, the cosecant function is also
an odd function. That is, csc( −x )=−cscx.

The graph of cosecant, which is shown in [\#](#), is similar to the
graph of secant.

<figure id="Figure_06_02_009">

</figure>

:::: {#fs-id1683902 .note}
::: title
Features of the Graph of *y* = *A*csc(*Bx*)
:::

A General note label

The stretching factor is

\|

A

\|

.

The period is

2

π

\|

B

\|

.

The domain is

x

≠

π

\|

B

\|

k

,

where

k

is an integer.

The range is

(

−

∞

,

−

\|

A

\|

\]

∪

\[

\|

A

\|

,

∞

)

.

The asymptotes occur at

x

=

π

\|

B

\|

k

,

where

k

is an integer.

y

=

A

csc

(

B

x

)

is an odd function because sine is an odd function.
::::

# Graphing Variations of *y* = sec *x* and *y*= csc *x* {#fs-id1670966}

For shifted, compressed, and/or stretched versions of the secant and
cosecant functions, we can follow similar methods to those we used for
tangent and cotangent. That is, we locate the vertical asymptotes and
also evaluate the functions for a few points (specifically the local
extrema). If we want to graph only a single period, we can choose the
interval for the period in more than one way. The procedure for secant
is very similar, because the cofunction identity means that the secant
graph is the same as the cosecant graph shifted half a period to the
left. Vertical and phase shifts may be applied to the cosecant function
in the same way as for the secant and other functions.The equations
become the following.

$$y = A\sec\left( {Bx - C} \right) + D$$

$$y = A\csc\left( {Bx - C} \right) + D$$

:::: {#eip-992 .note}
::: title
Features of the Graph of *y* = *A*sec(*Bx*−*C*)+*D*
:::

a general note label

The stretching factor is

\|

A

\|

.

The period is

2

π

\|

B

\|

.

The domain is

x

≠

C

B

\+

π

2

\|

B

\|

k

,

where

k

is an odd integer.

The range is

(

−

∞

,

−

\|

A

\|

\+

D

\]

∪

\[

\|

A

\|

\+

D

,

∞

)

.

The vertical asymptotes occur at

x

=

C

B

\+

π

2

\|

B

\|

k

,

where

k

is an odd integer.

There is no amplitude.

y

=

A

sec

(

B

x

\-

C

)

\+

D

is an even function because cosine is an even function.
::::

:::: {#eip-439 .note}
::: title
Features of the Graph of *y* = *A*csc(*Bx*−*C*)+*D*
:::

a general note label

The stretching factor is

\|

A

\|

.

The period is

2

π

\|

B

\|

.

The domain is

x

≠

C

B

\+

π

\|

B

\|

k

,

where

k

is an integer.

The range is

(

−

∞

,

−

\|

A

\|

\+

D

\]

∪

\[

\|

A

\|

\+

D

,

∞

)

.

The vertical asymptotes occur at

x

=

C

B

\+

π

\|

B

\|

k

,

where

k

is an integer.

There is no amplitude.

y

=

A

csc

(

B

x

\-

C

)

\+

D

is an odd function because sine is an odd function.
::::

:::: {#fs-id1420056 .note}
::: title
:::

How To Feature

*Given a function of the form y=Asec( Bx ), graph one period.*

Express the function given in the form

y

=

A

sec

(

B

x

)

.

Identify the stretching/compressing factor,

\|

A

\|

.

Identify

B

and determine the period,

P

=

2

π

\|

B

\|

.

Sketch the graph of

y

=

A

cos

(

B

x

)

.

Use the reciprocal relationship between

y

=

cos

x

and

y

=

sec

x

to draw the graph of

y

=

A

sec

(

B

x

)

.

Sketch the asymptotes.

Plot any two reference points and draw the graph through these points.
::::

::: {#Example_06_02_04 .example}
Graph one period of f(x)=2.5sec(0.4x).

Step 1.

The given function is already written in the general form,

y

=

A

sec

(

B

x

)

.

Step 2.

A

=

2.5

so the stretching factor is

2

.5

.

Step 3.

B

=

0.4

so

P

=

2

π

0.4

=

5

π

.

The period is

5

π

units.

Step 4.

Sketch the graph of the function

g

(

x

)

=

2.5

cos

(

0.4

x

)

.

Step 5.

Use the reciprocal relationship of the cosine and secant functions to
draw the cosecant function.

Steps 6--7.

Sketch two asymptotes at

x

=

1.25

π

and

x

=

3.75

π

.

We can use two reference points, the local minimum at

(

0

,

2.5

)

and the local maximum at

(

2.5

π

,

−2.5

)

.

shows the graph.

<figure id="Figure_06_02_010">

</figure>
:::

:::: {#fs-id1439628 .note}
::: title
:::

Try IT Feature

Graph one period of f(x)=−2.5sec(0.4x).

This is a vertical reflection of the preceding graph because A is
negative.
::::

:::: {#fs-id1570004 .note}
::: title
:::

QA Feature

*Do the vertical shift and stretch/compression affect the secant's
range?*

*Yes. The range of* f( x )=Asec( Bx−C )+D *is* ( −∞,−\| A \|+D \]∪\[ \|
A \|+D,∞ ).
::::

:::: {#fs-id1638418 .note}
::: title
:::

How To Feature

*Given a function of the form f( x )=Asec( Bx−C )+D, graph one period.*

Express the function given in the form

y

=

A

sec

(

B

x

−

C

)

\+

D

.

Identify the stretching/compressing factor,

\|

A

\|

.

Identify

B

and determine the period,

2

π

\|

B

\|

.

Identify

C

and determine the phase shift,

C

B

.

Draw the graph of

y

=

A

sec

(

B

x

)

, but shift it to the right by

C

B

and up by

D

.

Sketch the vertical asymptotes, which occur at

x

=

C

B

\+

π

2

\|

B

\|

k

,

where

k

is an odd integer.
::::

::: {#Example_06_02_05 .example}
Graph one period of y=4sec( π 3 x− π 2 )+1.

Step 1.

Express the function given in the form

y

=

4

sec

(

π

3

x

−

π

2

)

\+

1\.

Step 2.

The stretching/compressing factor is

\|

A

\|

=

4\.

Step 3.

The period is

$$\begin{array}{l}
{\frac{2\pi}{|B|} = \frac{2\pi}{\frac{\pi}{3}}} \\
{\text{~~~~~~} = \frac{2\pi}{1} \cdot \frac{3}{\pi}} \\
{\text{~~~~~~} = 6}
\end{array}$$

Step 4.

The phase shift is

$$\begin{array}{l}
{\frac{C}{B} = \frac{\frac{\pi}{2}}{\frac{\pi}{3}}} \\
{\text{~~~} = \frac{\pi}{2} \cdot \frac{3}{\pi}} \\
{\text{~~~} = 1.5}
\end{array}$$

Step 5.

Draw the graph of

y

=

A

sec

(

B

x

)

,

but shift it to the right by

C

B

=

1.5

and up by

D

=

1\.

Step 6.

Sketch the vertical asymptotes, which occur at

x

=

0

,

x

=

3

,

and

x

=

6\.

There is a local minimum at

(

1.5

,

5

)

and a local maximum at

(

4.5

,

−

3

)

.

shows the graph.

<figure id="Figure_06_02_012">

</figure>
:::

:::: {#fs-id1451968 .note}
::: title
:::

Try IT Feature

Graph one period of f( x )=−6sec(4x+2)−8.
::::

:::: {#fs-id1523838 .note}
::: title
:::

QA Feature

*The domain of cscx was given to be all x such that x≠kπ for any integer
k. *Would the domain of* y=Acsc(Bx−C)+Dbex≠ C+kπ B ?*

*Yes. The excluded points of the domain follow the vertical asymptotes.
Their locations show the horizontal shift and compression or expansion
implied by the transformation to the original function's input.*
::::

:::: {#fs-id1428931 .note}
::: title
:::

How To Feature

*Given a function of the form y=Acsc( Bx ), graph one period.*

Express the function given in the form

y

=

A

csc

(

B

x

)

.

\|

A

\|

.

Identify

B

and determine the period,

P

=

2

π

\|

B

\|

.

Draw the graph of

y

=

A

sin

(

B

x

)

.

Use the reciprocal relationship between

y

=

sin

x

and

y

=

csc

x

to draw the graph of

y

=

A

csc

(

B

x

)

.

Sketch the asymptotes.

Plot any two reference points and draw the graph through these points.
::::

::: {#Example_06_02_06 .example}
Graph one period of f(x)=−3csc(4x).

Step 1.

The given function is already written in the general form,

y

=

A

csc

(

B

x

)

.

Step 2.

\|

A

\|

=

\|

−

3

\|

=

3

,

so the stretching factor is 3.

Step 3.

B

=

4

,

so

P

=

2

π

4

=

π

2

.

The period is

π

2

units.

Step 4.

Sketch the graph of the function

g

(

x

)

=

−3

sin

(

4

x

)

.

Step 5.

Use the reciprocal relationship of the sine and cosecant functions to
draw the

cosecant function

.

Steps 6--7.

Sketch three asymptotes at

x

=

0

,

x

=

π

4

,

and

x

=

π

2

.

We can use two reference points, the local maximum at

(

π

8

,

−3

)

and the local minimum at

(

3

π

8

,

3

)

.

shows the graph.

<figure id="Figure_06_02_023">

</figure>
:::

:::: {#fs-id1714936 .note}
::: title
:::

try it feature

Graph one period of f(x)=0.5csc(2x).
::::

:::: {#fs-id978295 .note}
::: title
:::

how to feature

*Given a function of the form f( x )=Acsc( Bx−C )+D, graph one period.*

Express the function given in the form

y

=

A

csc

(

B

x

−

C

)

\+

D

.

Identify the stretching/compressing factor,

\|

A

\|

.

Identify

B

and determine the period,

2

π

\|

B

\|

.

Identify

C

and determine the phase shift,

C

B

.

Draw the graph of

y

=

A

csc

(

B

x

)

but shift it to the right by

C

B

and up by

D

.

Sketch the vertical asymptotes, which occur at

x

=

C

B

\+

π

\|

B

\|

k

,

where

k

is an integer.
::::

::: {#Example_06_02_07 .example}
Sketch a graph of y=2csc( π 2 x )+1. What are the domain and range of
this function?

Step 1.

Express the function given in the form

y

=

2

csc

(

π

2

x

)

\+

1\.

Step 2.

Identify the stretching/compressing factor,

\|

A

\|

=

2\.

Step 3.

The period is

2

π

\|

B

\|

=

2

π

π

2

=

2

π

1

⋅

2

π

=

4\.

Step 4.

The phase shift is

0

π

2

=

0\.

Step 5.

Draw the graph of

y

=

A

csc

(

B

x

)

but shift it up

D

=

1\.

Step 6.

Sketch the vertical asymptotes, which occur at

x

=

0

,

x

=

2

,

x

=

4\.

The graph for this function is shown in [\#](#).

<figure id="Figure_06_02_014">

</figure>

The vertical asymptotes shown on the graph mark off one period of the
function, and the local extrema in this interval are shown by dots.
Notice how the graph of the transformed cosecant relates to the graph of
f(x)=2sin( π 2 x )+1, shown as the orange dashed wave.
:::

:::: {#fs-id1588757 .note}
::: title
:::

try it feature

Given the graph of f(x)=2cos( π 2 x )+1 shown in [\#](#), sketch the
graph of g(x)=2sec( π 2 x )+1 on the same axes.

<figure id="Figure_06_02_015">

</figure>
::::

# Analyzing the Graph of *y* = cot *x* {#fs-id1232916}

The last trigonometric function we need to explore is cotangent. The
cotangent is defined by the reciprocal identity cotx= 1 tanx . Notice
that the function is undefined when the tangent function is 0, leading
to a vertical asymptote in the graph at 0,π, etc. Since the output of
the tangent function is all real numbers, the output of the cotangent
function is also all real numbers.

We can graph y=cotx by observing the graph of the tangent function
because these two functions are reciprocals of one another. See [\#](#).
Where the graph of the tangent function decreases, the graph of the
cotangent function increases. Where the graph of the tangent function
increases, the graph of the cotangent function decreases.

The cotangent graph has vertical asymptotes at each value of x where
tanx=0; we show these in the graph below with dashed lines. Since the
cotangent is the reciprocal of the tangent, cotx has vertical asymptotes
at all values of x where tanx=0, and cotx=0 at all values of x where
tanx has its vertical asymptotes.

<figure id="Figure_06_02_017">

</figure>

:::: {#fs-id1283383 .note}
::: title
Features of the Graph of *y* = *A*cot(*Bx*)
:::

a general note label

The stretching factor is

\|

A

\|

.

The period is

P

=

π

\|

B

\|

.

The domain is

x

≠

π

\|

B

\|

k

,

where

k

is an integer.

The range is

(

−

∞

,

∞

)

.

The asymptotes occur at

x

=

π

\|

B

\|

k

,

where

k

is an integer.

y

=

A

cot

(

B

x

)

is an odd function.
::::

# Graphing Variations of *y* = cot *x* {#fs-id1352247}

We can transform the graph of the cotangent in much the same way as we
did for the tangent. The equation becomes the following.

$$y = A\cot\left( {Bx - C} \right) + D$$

:::: {#fs-id1658740 .note}
::: title
Features of the Graph of *y* = *A*cot(*Bx*−C)+*D*
:::

a general note label

The stretching factor is

\|

A

\|

.

The period is

π

\|

B

\|

.

The domain is

x

≠

C

B

\+

π

\|

B

\|

k

,

where

k

is an integer.

The range is

(

−∞

,

∞

)

.

The vertical asymptotes occur at

x

=

C

B

\+

π

\|

B

\|

k

,

where

k

is an integer.

There is no amplitude.

y

=

A

cot

(

B

x

)

is an odd function because it is the quotient of even and odd functions
(cosine and sine, respectively)
::::

:::: {#fs-id1526877 .note}
::: title
:::

how to feature

*Given a modified cotangent function of the form f( x )=Acot( Bx ),
graph one period.*

Express the function in the form

f

(

x

)

=

A

cot

(

B

x

)

.

Identify the stretching factor,

\|

A

\|

.

Identify the period,

P

=

π

\|

B

\|

.

Draw the graph of

y

=

A

tan

(

B

x

)

.

Plot any two reference points.

Use the reciprocal relationship between tangent and cotangent to draw
the graph of

y

=

A

cot

(

B

x

)

.

Sketch the asymptotes.
::::

::: {#Example_06_02_08 .example}
Determine the stretching factor, period, and phase shift of y=3cot(4x),
and then sketch a graph.

Step 1.

Expressing the function in the form

f

(

x

)

=

A

cot

(

B

x

)

gives

f

(

x

)

=

3

cot

(

4

x

)

.

Step 2.

The stretching factor is

\|

A

\|

=

3\.

Step 3.

The period is

P

=

π

4

.

Step 4.

Sketch the graph of

y

=

3

tan

(

4

x

)

.

Step 5.

Plot two reference points. Two such points are

(

π

16

,

3

)

and

(

3

π

16

,

−3

)

.

Step 6.

Use the reciprocal relationship to draw

y

=

3

cot

(

4

x

)

.

Step 7.

Sketch the asymptotes,

x

=

0

,

x

=

π

4

.

The blue graph in [\#](#) shows y=3tan( 4x ) and the green graph shows
y=3cot( 4x ).

<figure id="Figure_06_02_019">

</figure>
:::

:::: {#fs-id1508070 .note}
::: title
:::

how to feature

*Given a modified cotangent function of the form f( x )=Acot( Bx−C )+D,
graph one period.*

Express the function in the form

f

(

x

)

=

A

cot

(

B

x

−

C

)

\+

D

.

Identify the stretching factor,

\|

A

\|

.

Identify the period,

P

=

π

\|

B

\|

.

Identify the phase shift,

C

B

.

Draw the graph of

y

=

A

tan

(

B

x

)

shifted to the right by

C

B

and up by

D

.

Sketch the asymptotes

x

=

C

B

\+

π

\|

B

\|

k

,

where

k

is an integer.

Plot any three reference points and draw the graph through these points.
::::

::: {#Example_06_02_09 .example}
Sketch a graph of one period of the function f( x )=4cot( π 8 x− π 2
)−2.

Step 1.

The function is already written in the general form

f

(

x

)

=

A

cot

(

B

x

−

C

)

\+

D

.

Step 2.

A

=

4

,

so the stretching factor is 4.

Step 3.

B

=

π

8

,

so the period is

P

=

π

\|

B

\|

=

π

π

8

=

8\.

Step 4.

C

=

π

2

,

so the phase shift is

C

B

=

π

2

π

8

=

4\.

Step 5.

We draw

f

(

x

)

=

4

tan

(

π

8

x

−

π

2

)

−

2\.

Step 6-7.

Three points we can use to guide the graph are

(

6

,

2

)

,

(

8

,

−

2

)

,

and

(

10

,

−

6

)

.

We use the reciprocal relationship of tangent and cotangent to draw

f

(

x

)

=

4

cot

(

π

8

x

−

π

2

)

−

2\.

Step 8.

The vertical asymptotes are

x

=

4

and

x

=

12\.

The graph is shown in [\#](#).

<figure id="Figure_06_02_020">

</figure>
:::

# Using the Graphs of Trigonometric Functions to Solve Real-World Problems {#fs-id1461208}

Many real-world scenarios represent periodic functions and may be
modeled by trigonometric functions. As an example, let's return to the
scenario from the section opener. Have you ever observed the beam formed
by the rotating light on a fire truck and wondered about the movement of
the light beam itself across the wall? The periodic behavior of the
distance the light shines as a function of time is obvious, but how do
we determine the distance? We can use the tangent function.

::: {#Example_06_02_10 .example}
Suppose the function y=5tan( π 4 t ) marks the distance in the movement
of a light beam from the top of a police car across a wall where t is
the time in seconds and y is the distance in feet from a point on the
wall directly across from the police car.

ⓐ

Find and interpret the stretching factor and period.

ⓑ

Graph on the interval

\[

0

,

5

\]

.

ⓒ

Evaluate

f

(

1

)

and discuss the function's value at that input.

ⓐ

We know from the general form of

y

=

A

tan

(

B

t

)

that

\|

A

\|

is the stretching factor and

π

B

is the period.

<figure id="Image_06_02_022">

</figure>

The vertical stretch factor of 5 means that the beam will have moved 5
feet in the one-quarter period before or after the half-period mark.
This corresponds to the y-value of the standard tangent function being 1
at one-quarter of the period away from the center of the period,
multiplied by the stretching factor of 5.

The period is π π 4 = π 1 ⋅ 4 π =4. This means that every 4 seconds, the
beam of light sweeps the wall. The distance from the spot across from
the police car grows larger as the police car approaches.

ⓑ

To graph the function, we draw an asymptote at

t

=

2

and use the stretching factor and period. See

<figure id="Image_06_02_021">

</figure>

ⓒ

period:

f

(

1

)

=

5

tan

(

π

4

(

1

)

)

=

5

(

1

)

=

5

;

after 1 second, the beam of has moved 5 ft from the spot across from the
police car.
:::

:::: {#fs-id1701460 .note}
::: title
:::

media feature label

Access these online resources for additional instruction and practice
with graphs of other trigonometric functions.

Graphing the Tangent

Graphing Cosecant and Secant

Graphing the Cotangent
::::

# Key Equations {#fs-id1526416}

  ---------------------------------------------------------- ------------------
  Shifted, compressed, and/or stretched tangent function     y=Atan( Bx−C )+D
  Shifted, compressed, and/or stretched secant function      y=Asec( Bx−C )+D
  Shifted, compressed, and/or stretched cosecant function    y=Acsc( Bx−C )+D
  Shifted, compressed, and/or stretched cotangent function   y=Acot( Bx−C )+D
  ---------------------------------------------------------- ------------------

# Key Concepts {#fs-id1693998}

The tangent function has period

π

.

f

(

x

)

=

A

tan

(

B

x

−

C

)

\+

D

is a tangent with vertical and/or horizontal stretch/compression and
shift. See

,

, and

.

The secant and cosecant are both periodic functions with a period of

2

π

.

f

(

x

)

=

A

sec

(

B

x

−

C

)

\+

D

gives a shifted, compressed, and/or stretched secant function graph. See

and

.

f

(

x

)

=

A

csc

(

B

x

−

C

)

\+

D

gives a shifted, compressed, and/or stretched cosecant function graph.
See

and

.

The cotangent function has period

π

and vertical asymptotes at

0

,

±

π

,

±

2

π

,

\...

The range of cotangent is

(

−

∞

,

∞

)

,

and the function is decreasing at each point in its range.

The cotangent is zero at

±

π

2

,

±

3

π

2

,

\...

f

(

x

)

=

A

cot

(

B

x

−

C

)

\+

D

is a cotangent with vertical and/or horizontal stretch/compression and
shift. See

and

.

Real-world scenarios can be solved using graphs of trigonometric
functions. See

.

# Section Exercises {#fs-id878869}

## Verbal {#fs-id878873}

Explain how the graph of the sine function can be used to graph y=cscx.

Since y=cscx is the reciprocal function of y=sinx, you can plot the
reciprocal of the coordinates on the graph of y=sinx to obtain the
*y*-coordinates of y=cscx. The *x*-intercepts of the graph y=sinx are
the vertical asymptotes for the graph of y=cscx.

How can the graph of y=cosx be used to construct the graph of y=secx?

Explain why the period of tanx is equal to π.

Answers will vary. Using the unit circle, one can show that tan( x+π
)=tanx.

Why are there no intercepts on the graph of y=cscx?

How does the period of y=cscx compare with the period of y=sinx?

The period is the same: 2π.

## Algebraic {#fs-id1608979}

For the following exercises, match each trigonometric function with one
of the following graphs.

<figure id="fs-idm479076032">

</figure>

f( x )=tanx

f( x )=secx

IV

f( x )=cscx

f( x )=cotx

III

For the following exercises, find the period and horizontal shift of
each of the functions.

f( x )=2tan( 4x−32 )

h( x )=2sec( π 4 ( x+1 ) )

period: 8; horizontal shift: 1 unit to left

m( x )=6csc( π 3 x+π )

For the following exercises, evaluate the transformed functions.

If tanx=−1.5, find tan( −x ).

1.5

If secx=2, find sec( −x ).

If cscx=−5, find csc( −x ).

5

If xsinx=2, find ( −x )sin( −x ).

For the following exercises, rewrite each expression such that the
argument x is positive.

cot( −x )cos( −x )+sin( −x )

−cotxcosx−sinx

cos( −x )+tan( −x )sin( −x )

## Graphical {#fs-id1513346}

For the following exercises, sketch two periods of the graph for each of
the following functions. Identify the stretching factor, period, and
asymptotes.

f( x )=2tan( 4x−32 )

stretching factor: 2; period: π 4 ; asymptotes: x= 1 4 ( π 2 +πk
)+8, where k is an integer

h( x )=2sec( π 4 ( x+1 ) )

m( x )=6csc( π 3 x+π )

stretching factor: 6; period: 6; asymptotes: x=3k, where k is an integer

j( x )=tan( π 2 x )

p(x)=tan( x− π 2 )

stretching factor: 1; period: π; asymptotes: x=πk, where k is an integer

f(x)=4tan(x)

f(x)=tan( x+ π 4 )

Stretching factor: 1; period: π; asymptotes: x= π 4
+πk, where k is an integer

f(x)=πtan( πx−π )−π

f( x )=2csc( x )

stretching factor: 2; period: 2π; asymptotes:
x=πk, where k is an integer

f( x )=− 1 4 csc( x )

f(x)=4sec( 3x )

stretching factor: 4; period: 2π 3 ; asymptotes: x= π 6
k, where k is an odd integer

f(x)=−3cot( 2x )

f(x)=7sec( 5x )

stretching factor: 7; period: 2π 5 ; asymptotes: x= π 10
k, where k is an odd integer

f(x)= 9 10 csc( πx )

f(x)=2csc( x+ π 4 )−1

stretching factor: 2; period: 2π; asymptotes: x=− π 4
+πk, where k is an integer

f(x)=−sec( x− π 3 )−2

f(x)= 7 5 csc( x− π 4 )

stretching factor: 7 5 ; period: 2π; asymptotes: x= π 4
+πk, where k is an integer

f(x)=5( cot( x+ π 2 )−3 )

For the following exercises, find and graph two periods of the periodic
function with the given stretching factor, \| A \|, period, and phase
shift.

A tangent curve, A=1, period of π 3 ; and phase shift ( h,k )=( π 4 ,2 )

y=tan( 3( x− π 4 ) )+2

A tangent curve, A=−2, period of π 4 , and phase shift ( h,k )=( − π 4
,−2 )

For the following exercises, find an equation for the graph of each
function.

f( x )=csc( 2x )

f( x )=csc( 4x )

f( x )=2cscx

f(x)= 1 2 tan(100πx)

## Technology {#fs-id1678301}

For the following exercises, use a graphing calculator to graph two
periods of the given function. Note: most graphing calculators do not
have a cosecant button; therefore, you will need to input cscx as 1 sinx
.

f(x)=\| csc( x ) \|

f(x)=\| cot( x ) \|

f(x)= 2 csc( x )

f(x)= csc( x ) sec( x )

Graph f(x)=1+ sec 2 ( x )− tan 2 ( x ). What is the function shown in
the graph?

f(x)=sec( 0.001x )

f(x)=cot( 100πx )

f(x)= sin 2 x+ cos 2 x

## Real-World Applications {#fs-id1526988}

The function f( x )=20tan( π 10 x ) marks the distance in the movement
of a light beam from a police car across a wall for time x, in seconds,
and distance f( x ), in feet.

ⓐ

Graph on the interval

\[

0

,

5

\]

.

ⓑ

Find and interpret the stretching factor, period, and asymptote.

ⓒ

Evaluate

f

(

1

)

and

f

(

2.5

)

and discuss the function's values at those inputs.

Standing on the shore of a lake, a fisherman sights a boat far in the
distance to his left. Let x, measured in radians, be the angle formed by
the line of sight to the ship and a line due north from his position.
Assume due north is 0 and x is measured negative to the left and
positive to the right. (See [\#](#).) The boat travels from due west to
due east and, ignoring the curvature of the Earth, the distance d( x ),
in kilometers, from the fisherman to the boat is given by the function
d( x )=1.5sec( x ).

ⓐ

What is a reasonable domain for

d

(

x

)

?

ⓑ

Graph

d

(

x

)

on this domain.

ⓒ

Find and discuss the meaning of any vertical asymptotes on the graph of

d

(

x

)

.

ⓓ

Calculate and interpret

d

(

−

π

3

)

.

Round to the second decimal place.

ⓔ

Calculate and interpret

d

(

π

6

)

.

Round to the second decimal place.

ⓕ

What is the minimum distance between the fisherman and the boat? When
does this occur?

<figure id="Figure_06_02_237">

</figure>

ⓐ

(

−

π

2

,

π

2

)

;

ⓑ

ⓒ

x

=

−

π

2

and

x

=

π

2

;

the distance grows without bound as

\|

x

\|

approaches

π

2

---i.e., at right angles to the line representing due north, the boat
would be so far away, the fisherman could not see it;

ⓓ

3; when

x

=

−

π

3

,

the boat is 3 km away;

ⓔ

1.73; when

x

=

π

6

,

the boat is about 1.73 km away;

ⓕ

1.5 km; when

x

=

0

A laser rangefinder is locked on a comet approaching Earth. The distance
g( x ), in kilometers, of the comet after x days, for x in the interval
0 to 30 days, is given by g( x )=250,000csc( π 30 x ).

ⓐ

Graph

g

(

x

)

on the interval

\[

0

,

30

\]

.

ⓑ

Evaluate

g

(

5

)

and interpret the information.

ⓒ

What is the minimum distance between the comet and Earth? When does this
occur? To which constant in the equation does this correspond?

ⓓ

Find and discuss the meaning of any vertical asymptotes.

A video camera is focused on a rocket on a launching pad 2 miles from
the camera. The angle of elevation from the ground to the rocket after x
seconds is π 120 x.

ⓐ

Write a function expressing the altitude

h

(

x

)

,

in miles, of the rocket above the ground after

x

seconds. Ignore the curvature of the Earth.

ⓑ

Graph

h

(

x

)

on the interval

(

0

,

60

)

.

ⓒ

Evaluate and interpret the values

h

(

0

)

and

h

(

30

)

.

ⓓ

What happens to the values of

h

(

x

)

as

x

approaches 60 seconds? Interpret the meaning of this in terms of the
problem.

ⓐ

h

(

x

)

=

2

tan

(

π

120

x

)

;

ⓑ

ⓒ

h

(

0

)

=

0

:

after 0 seconds, the rocket is 0 mi above the ground;

h

(

30

)

=

2

:

after 30 seconds, the rockets is 2 mi high;

ⓓ

As

x

approaches 60 seconds, the values of

h

(

x

)

grow increasingly large. The distance to the rocket is growing so large
that the camera can no longer track it.
