m49390

> In this section, you will:
>
> Understand and use the inverse sine, cosine, and tangent functions.
>
> Find the exact value of expressions involving the inverse sine,
> cosine, and tangent functions.
>
> Use a calculator to evaluate inverse trigonometric functions.
>
> Find exact values of composite functions with inverse trigonometric
> functions.

6883d2f3-f1d0-4c3b-b9bb-d2c1a1a1f950

For any right triangle, given one other angle and the length of one
side, we can figure out what the other angles and sides are. But what if
we are given only two sides of a right triangle? We need a procedure
that leads us from a ratio of sides to an angle. This is where the
notion of an inverse to a trigonometric function comes into play. In
this section, we will explore the inverse trigonometric functions.

# Understanding and Using the Inverse Sine, Cosine, and Tangent Functions {#fs-id1165135296329}

In order to use inverse trigonometric functions, we need to understand
that an inverse trigonometric function "undoes" what the original
trigonometric function "does," as is the case with any other function
and its inverse. In other words, the domain of the inverse function is
the range of the original function, and vice versa, as summarized in
[\#](#).

<figure id="Figure_06_03_013">

</figure>

For example, if f(x)=sinx, then we would write f −1 (x)= sin −1 x. Be
aware that sin −1 x does not mean 1 sinx . The following examples
illustrate the inverse trigonometric functions:

Since

sin

(

π

6

)

=

1

2

,

then

π

6

=

sin

−

1

(

1

2

)

.

Since

cos

(

π

)

=

−

1

,

then

π

=

cos

−

1

(

−

1

)

.

Since

tan

(

π

4

)

=

1

,

then

π

4

=

tan

−

1

(

1

)

.

In previous sections, we evaluated the trigonometric functions at
various angles, but at times we need to know what angle would yield a
specific sine, cosine, or tangent value. For this, we need inverse
functions. Recall that, for a one-to-one function, if f(a)=b, then an
inverse function would satisfy f −1 (b)=a.

Bear in mind that the sine, cosine, and tangent functions are not
one-to-one functions. The graph of each function would fail the
horizontal line test. In fact, no periodic function can be one-to-one
because each output in its range corresponds to at least one input in
every period, and there are an infinite number of periods. As with other
functions that are not one-to-one, we will need to restrict the domain
of each function to yield a new function that is one-to-one. We choose a
domain for each function that includes the number 0. [\#](#) shows the
graph of the sine function limited to \[ − π 2 , π 2 \] and the graph of
the cosine function limited to \[ 0,π \].

<figure id="Figure_06_03_001">

</figure>

[\#](#) shows the graph of the tangent function limited to ( − π 2 , π 2
).

<figure id="Figure_06_03_003">

</figure>

These conventional choices for the restricted domain are somewhat
arbitrary, but they have important, helpful characteristics. Each domain
includes the origin and some positive values, and most importantly, each
results in a one-to-one function that is invertible. The conventional
choice for the restricted domain of the tangent function also has the
useful property that it extends from one vertical asymptote to the next
instead of being divided into two parts by an asymptote.

On these restricted domains, we can define the inverse trigonometric
functions.

The

inverse sine function

y

=

sin

−

1

x

means

x

=

sin

y

.

The inverse sine function is sometimes called the

arcsine

function, and notated

arcsin

x

.

$$y = \sin^{- 1}x\;\text{has~domain}\;\lbrack-1,1\rbrack\;\text{and~range}\;\left\lbrack {- \frac{\pi}{2},\frac{\pi}{2}} \right\rbrack$$

The

inverse cosine function

y

=

cos

−

1

x

means

x

=

cos

y

.

The inverse cosine function is sometimes called the

arccosine

function, and notated

arccos

x

.

$$y = \cos^{- 1}x\;\text{has~domain}\;\lbrack-1,1\rbrack\;\text{and~range}\;\lbrack 0,\pi\rbrack$$

The

inverse tangent function

y

=

tan

−

1

x

means

x

=

tan

y

.

The inverse tangent function is sometimes called the

arctangent

function, and notated

arctan

x

.

$$y = \tan^{- 1}x\;\text{has~domain}\;({-\infty},\infty)\;\text{and~range}\;\left( {- \frac{\pi}{2},\frac{\pi}{2}} \right)$$

The graphs of the inverse functions are shown in [\#](#), [\#](#), and
[\#](#). Notice that the output of each of these inverse functions is a
*number,* an angle in radian measure. We see that sin −1 x has domain \[
−1,1 \] and range \[ − π 2 , π 2 \], cos −1 x has domain \[ −1,1 \] and
range \[0,π\], and tan −1 x has domain of all real numbers and range ( −
π 2 , π 2 ). To find the domain and range of inverse trigonometric
functions, switch the domain and range of the original functions. Each
graph of the inverse trigonometric function is a reflection of the graph
of the original function about the line y=x.

<figure id="Figure_06_03_004">

</figure>

<figure id="Figure_06_03_005">

</figure>

<figure id="Figure_06_03_006">

</figure>

:::: {#fs-id1165135528318 .note}
::: title
Relations for Inverse Sine, Cosine, and Tangent Functions
:::

For angles in the interval \[ − π 2 , π 2 \], if siny=x, then sin −1
x=y.

For angles in the interval \[ 0,π \], if cosy=x, then cos −1 x=y.

For angles in the interval ( − π 2 , π 2 ), if tany=x, then tan −1 x=y.
::::

::: {#Example_06_03_01 .example}
Given sin( 5π 12 )≈0.96593, write a relation involving the inverse sine.

Use the relation for the inverse sine. If siny=x, then sin −1 x=y .

In this problem, x=0.96593, and y= 5π 12 .

$$\sin^{- 1}(0.96593) \approx \frac{5\pi}{12}$$
:::

:::: {#fs-id1165134468915 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Given cos(0.5)≈0.8776, write a relation involving the inverse cosine.

arccos(0.8776)≈0.5
::::

# Finding the Exact Value of Expressions Involving the Inverse Sine, Cosine, and Tangent Functions {#fs-id1165135364545}

Now that we can identify inverse functions, we will learn to evaluate
them. For most values in their domains, we must evaluate the inverse
trigonometric functions by using a calculator, interpolating from a
table, or using some other numerical technique. Just as we did with the
original trigonometric functions, we can give exact values for the
inverse functions when we are using the special angles, specifically π 6
(30°), π 4 (45°), and π 3 (60°), and their reflections into other
quadrants.

:::: {#fs-id1165135445917 .note}
::: title
:::

How To

*Given a "special" input value, evaluate an inverse trigonometric
function.*

Find angle

x

for which the original trigonometric function has an output equal to the
given input for the inverse trigonometric function.

If

x

is not in the defined range of the inverse, find another angle

y

that is in the defined range and has the same sine, cosine, or tangent
as

x

,

depending on which corresponds to the given inverse function.
::::

::: {#Example_06_03_02 .example}
Evaluate each of the following.

ⓐ

sin

−

1

(

1

2

)

ⓑ

sin

−

1

(

−

2

2

)

ⓒ

cos

−

1

(

−

3

2

)

ⓓ

tan

−

1

(

1

)

ⓐ

Evaluating

sin

−

1

(

1

2

)

is the same as determining the angle that would have a sine value of

1

2

.

In other words, what angle

x

would satisfy

sin

(

x

)

=

1

2

?

There are multiple values that would satisfy this relationship, such as

π

6

and

5

π

6

,

but we know we need the angle in the interval

\[

−

π

2

,

π

2

\]

,

so the answer will be

sin

−

1

(

1

2

)

=

π

6

.

Remember that the inverse is a function, so for each input, we will get
exactly one output.

ⓑ

To evaluate

sin

−

1

(

−

2

2

)

,

we know that

5

π

4

and

7

π

4

both have a sine value of

−

2

2

,

but neither is in the interval

\[

−

π

2

,

π

2

\]

.

For that, we need the negative angle coterminal with

7

π

4

:

sin

−

1

(

−

2

2

)

=

−

π

4

.

ⓒ

To evaluate

cos

−

1

(

−

3

2

)

,

we are looking for an angle in the interval

\[

0

,

π

\]

with a cosine value of

−

3

2

.

The angle that satisfies this is

cos

−

1

(

−

3

2

)

=

5

π

6

.

ⓓ

Evaluating

tan

−

1

(

1

)

,

we are looking for an angle in the interval

(

−

π

2

,

π

2

)

with a tangent value of 1. The correct angle is

tan

−

1

(

1

)

=

π

4

.
:::

:::: {#fs-id1165135571871 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Evaluate each of the following.

ⓐ

sin

−1

(

−1

)

ⓑ

tan

−1

(

−1

)

ⓒ

cos

−1

(

−1

)

ⓓ

cos

−1

(

1

2

)

ⓐ

−

π

2

;

ⓑ

−

π

4

;

ⓒ

π

;

ⓓ

π

3
::::

# Using a Calculator to Evaluate Inverse Trigonometric Functions {#fs-id1165135416507}

To evaluate inverse trigonometric functions that do not involve the
special angles discussed previously, we will need to use a calculator or
other type of technology. Most scientific calculators and
calculator-emulating applications have specific keys or buttons for the
inverse sine, cosine, and tangent functions. These may be labeled, for
example, *SIN* −1 , *ARCSIN*, or *ASIN*.

In the previous chapter, we worked with trigonometry on a right triangle
to solve for the sides of a triangle given one side and an additional
angle. Using the inverse trigonometric functions, we can solve for the
angles of a right triangle given two sides, and we can use a calculator
to find the values to several decimal places.

In these examples and exercises, the answers will be interpreted as
angles and we will use θ as the independent variable. The value
displayed on the calculator may be in degrees or radians, so be sure to
set the mode appropriate to the application.

::: {#Example_06_03_03 .example}
Evaluate sin −1 (0.97) using a calculator.

Because the output of the inverse function is an angle, the calculator
will give us a degree value if in degree mode and a radian value if in
radian mode. Calculators also use the same domain restrictions on the
angles as we are using.

In radian mode, sin −1 (0.97)≈1.3252. In degree mode, sin −1
(0.97)≈75.93°. Note that in calculus and beyond we will use radians in
almost all cases.
:::

:::: {#fs-id1165134199522 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Evaluate cos −1 ( −0.4 ) using a calculator.

1.9823 or 113.578°
::::

:::: {#fs-id1165134572555 .note}
::: title
:::

How To

*Given two sides of a right triangle like the one shown in [\#](#), find
an angle.*

<figure id="Figure_06_03_012">

</figure>

If one given side is the hypotenuse of length

h

and the side of length

a

adjacent to the desired angle is given, use the equation

θ

=

cos

−

1

(

a

h

)

.

If one given side is the hypotenuse of length

h

and the side of length

p

opposite to the desired angle is given, use the equation

θ

=

sin

−

1

(

p

h

)

.

If the two legs (the sides adjacent to the right angle) are given, then
use the equation

θ

=

tan

−

1

(

p

a

)

.
::::

::: {#Example_06_03_04 .example}
Solve the triangle in [\#](#) for the angle θ.

<figure id="Figure_06_03_007">

</figure>

Because we know the hypotenuse and the side adjacent to the angle, it
makes sense for us to use the cosine function.

$$\begin{array}{ll}
{\cos\;\theta = \frac{9}{12}} & \begin{array}{lll}
 & & 
\end{array} \\
{\theta = \cos^{- 1}(\frac{9}{12})} & {\begin{array}{lll}
 & & 
\end{array}\text{Apply~definition~of~the~inverse}.} \\
{\theta \approx 0.7227\text{~or~about~}41.4096{^\circ}} & {\begin{array}{lll}
 & & 
\end{array}\text{Evaluate}.}
\end{array}$$
:::

:::: {#fs-id1165137737008 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Solve the triangle in [\#](#) for the angle θ.

<figure id="Figure_06_03_008">

</figure>

sin −1 (0.6)=36.87°=0.6435 radians
::::

# Finding Exact Values of Composite Functions with Inverse Trigonometric Functions {#fs-id1165132971652}

There are times when we need to compose a trigonometric function with an
inverse trigonometric function. In these cases, we can usually find
exact values for the resulting expressions without resorting to a
calculator. Even when the input to the composite function is a variable
or an expression, we can often find an expression for the output. To
help sort out different cases, let f(x) and g(x) be two different
trigonometric functions belonging to the set { sin(x),cos(x),tan(x) }
and let f −1 (y) and g −1 (y) be their inverses.

## Evaluating Compositions of the Form *f*(*f*−1(*y*)) and *f*−1(*f*(*x*)) {#fs-id1165135173155}

For any trigonometric function, f( f −1 ( y ) )=y for all y in the
proper domain for the given function. This follows from the definition
of the inverse and from the fact that the range of f was defined to be
identical to the domain of f −1 . However, we have to be a little more
careful with expressions of the form f −1 ( f( x ) ).

:::: {#fs-id1165135332809 .note}
::: title
Compositions of a trigonometric function and its inverse
:::

$$\begin{array}{l}
{\sin(\sin^{- 1}x) = x\;\text{for}\; - 1 \leq x \leq 1} \\
{\cos(\cos^{- 1}x) = x\;\text{for}\; - 1 \leq x \leq 1} \\
{\tan(\tan^{- 1}x) = x\;\text{for}\; - \infty < x < \infty}
\end{array}$$

$$\begin{array}{l}
{\sin^{- 1}(\sin\; x) = x\;\text{only~for~} - \frac{\pi}{2} \leq x \leq \frac{\pi}{2}} \\
{\cos^{- 1}(\cos\; x) = x\;\text{only~for~}0 \leq x \leq \pi} \\
{\tan^{- 1}(\tan\; x\;) = x\;\text{only~for~} - \frac{\pi}{2} < x < \frac{\pi}{2}}
\end{array}$$
::::

:::: {#fs-id1165135361177 .note}
::: title
:::

Q&A

*Is it correct that sin −1 (sinx)=x?*

*No. This equation is correct if x belongs to the restricted domain \[ −
π 2 , π 2 \], but sine is defined for all real input values, and for x
outside the restricted interval, the equation is not correct because its
inverse always returns a value in \[ − π 2 , π 2 \]. The situation is
similar for cosine and tangent and their inverses. For example, sin −1 (
sin( 3π 4 ) )= π 4 .*
::::

:::: {#fs-id1165135453004 .note}
::: title
:::

How To

*Given an expression of the form f−1(f(θ)) where
f(θ)=sinθ,cosθ, or tanθ, evaluate.*

If

θ

is in the restricted domain of

f

,

 then 

f

−

1

(

f

(

θ

)

)

=

θ

.

If not, then find an angle

ϕ

within the restricted domain of

f

such that

f

(

ϕ

)

=

f

(

θ

)

.

Then

f

−

1

(

f

(

θ

)

)

=

ϕ

.
::::

::: {#Example_06_03_05 .example}
Evaluate the following:

ⓐ

sin

−

1

(

sin

(

π

3

)

)

ⓑ

sin

−

1

(

sin

(

2

π

3

)

)

ⓒ

cos

−

1

(

cos

(

2

π

3

)

)

ⓓ

cos

−

1

(

cos

(

−

π

3

)

)

ⓐ

π

3

 is in 

\[

−

π

2

,

π

2

\]

,

so

sin

−

1

(

sin

(

π

3

)

)

=

π

3

.

ⓑ

2

π

3

 is not in 

\[

−

π

2

,

π

2

\]

,

but

sin

(

2

π

3

)

=

sin

(

π

3

)

,

so

sin

−

1

(

sin

(

2

π

3

)

)

=

π

3

.

ⓒ

2

π

3

 is in 

\[

0

,

π

\]

,

so

cos

−

1

(

cos

(

2

π

3

)

)

=

2

π

3

.

ⓓ

−

π

3

 is not in 

\[

0

,

π

\]

,

but

cos

(

−

π

3

)

=

cos

(

π

3

)

because cosine is an even function.

π

3

 is in 

\[

0

,

π

\]

,

so

cos

−

1

(

cos

(

−

π

3

)

)

=

π

3

.
:::

:::: {#fs-id1165137848808 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Evaluate tan −1 ( tan( π 8 ) )and tan −1 ( tan( 11π 9 ) ).

π 8 ; 2π 9
::::

## Evaluating Compositions of the Form *f*−1(*g*(*x*)) {#fs-id1165135149890}

Now that we can compose a trigonometric function with its inverse, we
can explore how to evaluate a composition of a trigonometric function
and the inverse of another trigonometric function. We will begin with
compositions of the form f −1 ( g( x ) ). For special values of x, we
can exactly evaluate the inner function and then the outer, inverse
function. However, we can find a more general approach by considering
the relation between the two acute angles of a right triangle where one
is θ, making the other π 2 −θ. Consider the sine and cosine of each
angle of the right triangle in [\#](#).

<figure id="Figure_06_03_009">

</figure>

Because cosθ= b c =sin( π 2 −θ ), we have sin −1 ( cosθ )= π 2 −θ if
0≤θ≤π. If θ is not in this domain, then we need to find another angle
that has the same cosine as θ and does belong to the restricted domain;
we then subtract this angle from π 2 . Similarly, sinθ= a c =cos( π 2 −θ
), so cos −1 ( sinθ )= π 2 −θ if − π 2 ≤θ≤ π 2 . These are just the
function-cofunction relationships presented in another way.

:::: {#fs-id1165135449630 .note}
::: title
:::

How To

*Given functions of the form sin −1 ( cosx ) and cos −1 ( sinx ),
evaluate them.*

If

x

 is in 

\[

0

,

π

\]

,

then

sin

−

1

(

cos

x

)

=

π

2

−

x

.

If

x

 is not in 

\[

0

,

π

\]

,

then find another angle

y

 in 

\[

0

,

π

\]

such that

cos

y

=

cos

x

.

$$\sin^{- 1}\left( {\cos\; x} \right) = \frac{\pi}{2} - y$$

If

x

 is in 

\[

−

π

2

,

π

2

\]

,

then

cos

−

1

(

sin

x

)

=

π

2

−

x

.

If

x

 is not in

\[

−

π

2

,

π

2

\]

,

then find another angle

y

 in 

\[

−

π

2

,

π

2

\]

such that

sin

y

=

sin

x

.

$$\cos^{- 1}\left( {\sin\; x} \right) = \frac{\pi}{2} - y$$
::::

::: {#Example_06_03_06 .example}
Evaluate sin −1 ( cos( 13π 6 ) )

ⓐ

by direct evaluation.

ⓑ

by the method described previously.

ⓐ

Here, we can directly evaluate the inside of the composition.

$$\begin{array}{l}
 \\
\begin{array}{l}
{\cos(\frac{13\pi}{6}) = \cos(\frac{\pi}{6} + 2\pi)} \\
{\text{~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~} = \cos(\frac{\pi}{6})} \\
{\text{~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~} = \frac{\sqrt{3}}{2}}
\end{array}
\end{array}$$

Now, we can evaluate the inverse function as we did earlier.

$$\sin^{- 1}\left( \frac{\sqrt{3}}{2} \right) = \frac{\pi}{3}$$

ⓑ

We have

x

=

13

π

6

,

y

=

π

6

,

and

$$\begin{array}{r}
{\sin^{- 1}\left( {\cos\left( \frac{13\pi}{6} \right)} \right) = \frac{\pi}{2} - \frac{\pi}{6}} \\
{= \frac{\pi}{3}\text{~~~~~~~}}
\end{array}$$
:::

:::: {#fs-id1165135523406 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Evaluate cos −1 ( sin( − 11π 4 ) ).

3π 4
::::

## Evaluating Compositions of the Form *f*(*g*−1(*x*)) {#fs-id1165137843168}

To evaluate compositions of the form f( g −1 ( x ) ), where f and g are
any two of the functions sine, cosine, or tangent and x is any input in
the domain of g −1 , we have exact formulas, such as sin( cos −1 x )= 1−
x 2 . When we need to use them, we can derive these formulas by using
the trigonometric relations between the angles and sides of a right
triangle, together with the use of Pythagoras's relation between the
lengths of the sides. We can use the Pythagorean identity, sin 2 x+ cos
2 x=1, to solve for one when given the other. We can also use the
inverse trigonometric functions to find compositions involving algebraic
expressions.

::: {#Example_06_03_07 .example}
Find an exact value for sin( cos −1 ( 4 5 ) ).

Beginning with the inside, we can say there is some angle such that θ=
cos −1 ( 4 5 ), which means cosθ= 4 5 , and we are looking for sinθ. We
can use the Pythagorean identity to do this.

$$\begin{array}{llll}
{\sin^{2}\theta + \cos^{2}\theta = 1} & & & {\text{Use~our~known~value~for~cosine}.} \\
{\sin^{2}\theta + {(\frac{4}{5})}^{2} = 1} & & & {\text{Solve~for~sine}.} \\
{\sin^{2}\theta = 1 - \frac{16}{25}} & & & \\
{\sin\;\theta = \pm \sqrt{\frac{9}{25}} = \pm \frac{3}{5}} & & & 
\end{array}$$

Since θ= cos −1 ( 4 5 ) is in quadrant I, sinθ must be positive, so the
solution is 3 5 . See [\#](#).

<figure id="Figure_06_03_010">

</figure>

We know that the inverse cosine always gives an angle on the interval \[
0,π \], so we know that the sine of that angle must be positive;
therefore sin( cos −1 ( 4 5 ) )=sinθ= 3 5 .
:::

:::: {#fs-id1165135176852 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Evaluate cos( tan −1 ( 5 12 ) ).

12 13
::::

::: {#Example_06_03_08 .example}
Find an exact value for sin( tan −1 ( 7 4 ) ).

While we could use a similar technique as in [\#](#), we will
demonstrate a different technique here. From the inside, we know there
is an angle such that tanθ= 7 4 . We can envision this as the opposite
and adjacent sides on a right triangle, as shown in [\#](#).

<figure id="Figure_06_03_011">

</figure>

Using the Pythagorean Theorem, we can find the hypotenuse of this
triangle.

$$\begin{array}{l}
\begin{array}{l}
 \\
{\text{~~~~~~}4^{2} + 7^{2} = \text{hypotenuse}^{2}}
\end{array} \\
{\text{hypotenuse} = \sqrt{65}}
\end{array}$$

Now, we can evaluate the sine of the angle as the opposite side divided
by the hypotenuse.

$$\sin\;\theta = \frac{7}{\sqrt{65}}$$

This gives us our desired composition.

$$\begin{array}{l}
{\sin\left( {\tan^{- 1}\left( \frac{7}{4} \right)} \right) = \sin\;\theta} \\
{\text{~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~} = \frac{7}{\sqrt{65}}} \\
{\text{~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~} = \frac{7\sqrt{65}}{65}}
\end{array}$$
:::

:::: {#fs-id1165137676834 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Evaluate cos( sin −1 ( 7 9 ) ).

4 2 9
::::

::: {#Example_06_03_09 .example}
Find a simplified expression for cos( sin −1 ( x 3 ) ) for −3≤x≤3.

We know there is an angle θ such that sinθ= x 3 .

$$\begin{array}{ll}
{\sin^{2}\theta + \cos^{2}\theta = 1} & {\text{Use~the~Pythagorean~Theorem}.} \\
{\mspace{9mu}\left( \frac{x}{3} \right)^{2} + \cos^{2}\theta = 1} & {\text{Solve~for~cosine}.} \\
{\cos^{2}\theta = 1 - \frac{x^{2}}{9}} & \\
{\cos\theta = \pm \sqrt{\frac{9 - x^{2}}{9}} = \pm \frac{\sqrt{9 - x^{2}}}{3}} & 
\end{array}$$

Because we know that the inverse sine must give an angle on the interval
\[ − π 2 , π 2 \], we can deduce that the cosine of that angle must be
positive.

$$\cos\left( {\sin^{- 1}\left( \frac{x}{3} \right)} \right) = \frac{\sqrt{9 - x^{2}}}{3}$$
:::

:::: {#fs-id1165133092635 .note}
::: title
:::

Try It

Find a simplified expression for sin( tan −1 ( 4x ) ) for − 1 4 ≤x≤ 1 4
.

4x 16 x 2 +1
::::

:::: {#fs-id1165134282131 .note}
::: title
:::

Media

Access this online resource for additional instruction and practice with
inverse trigonometric functions.

Evaluate Expressions Involving Inverse Trigonometric Functions
::::

# Key Concepts {#fs-id1165134282154}

An inverse function is one that "undoes" another function. The domain of
an inverse function is the range of the original function and the range
of an inverse function is the domain of the original function.

Because the trigonometric functions are not one-to-one on their natural
domains, inverse trigonometric functions are defined for restricted
domains.

For any trigonometric function

f

(

x

)

,

if

x

=

f

−

1

(

y

)

,

then

f

(

x

)

=

y

.

However,

f

(

x

)

=

y

only implies

x

=

f

−

1

(

y

)

if

x

is in the restricted domain of

f

.

See

.

Special angles are the outputs of inverse trigonometric functions for
special input values; for example,

π

4

=

tan

−

1

(

1

)

and

π

6

=

sin

−

1

(

1

2

)

.

See

.

A calculator will return an angle within the restricted domain of the
original trigonometric function. See

.

Inverse functions allow us to find an angle when given two sides of a
right triangle. See

.

In function composition, if the inside function is an inverse
trigonometric function, then there are exact expressions; for example,

sin

(

cos

−

1

(

x

)

)

=

1

−

x

2

.

See

.

If the inside function is a trigonometric function, then the only
possible combinations are

sin

−

1

(

cos

x

)

=

π

2

−

x

if

0

≤

x

≤

π

and

cos

−

1

(

sin

x

)

=

π

2

−

x

if

−

π

2

≤

x

≤

π

2

.

See

and

.

When evaluating the composition of a trigonometric function with an
inverse trigonometric function, draw a reference triangle to assist in
determining the ratio of sides that represents the output of the
trigonometric function. See

.

When evaluating the composition of a trigonometric function with an
inverse trigonometric function, you may use trig identities to assist in
determining the ratio of sides. See

.

# Section Exercises {#fs-id1165135621936}

## Verbal {#fs-id1165135621940}

Why do the functions f(x)= sin −1 x and g(x)= cos −1 x have different
ranges?

The function y=sinx is one-to-one on \[ − π 2 , π 2 \]; thus, this
interval is the range of the inverse function of y=sinx, f(x)= sin −1 x.
The function y=cosx is one-to-one on \[ 0,π \]; thus, this interval is
the range of the inverse function of y=cosx,f(x)= cos −1 x.

Since the functions y=cosx and y= cos −1 x are inverse functions, why is
cos −1 ( cos( − π 6 ) ) not equal to − π 6 ?

Explain the meaning of π 6 =arcsin( 0.5 ).

π 6 is the radian measure of an angle between − π 2 and π 2 whose sine
is 0.5.

Most calculators do not have a key to evaluate sec −1 ( 2 ). Explain how
this can be done using the cosine function or the inverse cosine
function.

Why must the domain of the sine function, sinx, be restricted to \[ − π
2 , π 2 \] for the inverse sine function to exist?

In order for any function to have an inverse, the function must be
one-to-one and must pass the horizontal line test. The regular sine
function is not one-to-one unless its domain is restricted in some way.
Mathematicians have agreed to restrict the sine function to the interval
\[ − π 2 , π 2 \] so that it is one-to-one and possesses an inverse.

Discuss why this statement is incorrect: arccos( cosx )=x for all x.

Determine whether the following statement is true or false and explain
your answer: arccos( −x )=π−arccosx.

True . The angle, θ 1 that equals arccos(−x) , x\>0 , will be a second
quadrant angle with reference angle, θ 2 , where θ 2 equals arccosx ,
x\>0 . Since θ 2 is the reference angle for θ 1 , θ 2 =π− θ 1 and
arccos(−x) = π−arccosx -

## Algebraic {#fs-id1165133249100}

For the following exercises, evaluate the expressions.

sin −1 ( 2 2 )

sin −1 ( − 1 2 )

− π 6

cos −1 ( 1 2 )

cos −1 ( − 2 2 )

3π 4

tan −1 ( 1 )

tan −1 ( − 3 )

− π 3

tan −1 ( −1 )

tan −1 ( 3 )

π 3

tan −1 ( −1 3 )

For the following exercises, use a calculator to evaluate each
expression. Express answers to the nearest hundredth.

cos −1 ( −0.4 )

1.98

arcsin( 0.23 )

arccos( 3 5 )

0.93

cos −1 ( 0.8 )

tan −1 ( 6 )

1.41

For the following exercises, find the angle θ in the given right
triangle. Round answers to the nearest hundredth.

0.56 radians

For the following exercises, find the exact value, if possible, without
a calculator. If it is not possible, explain why.

sin −1 ( cos( π ) )

tan −1 ( sin( π ) )

0

cos −1 ( sin( π 3 ) )

tan −1 ( sin( π 3 ) )

0.71

sin −1 ( cos( −π 2 ) )

tan −1 ( sin( 4π 3 ) )

-0.71

sin −1 ( sin( 5π 6 ) )

tan −1 ( sin( −5π 2 ) )

− π 4

cos( sin −1 ( 4 5 ) )

sin( cos −1 ( 3 5 ) )

0.8

sin( tan −1 ( 4 3 ) )

cos( tan −1 ( 12 5 ) )

5 13

cos( sin −1 ( 1 2 ) )

For the following exercises, find the exact value of the expression in
terms of x with the help of a reference triangle.

tan( sin −1 ( x−1 ) )

x−1 − x 2 +2x

sin( cos −1 ( 1−x ) )

cos( sin −1 ( 1 x ) )

x 2 −1 x

cos( tan −1 ( 3x−1 ) )

tan( sin −1 ( x+ 1 2 ) )

x+0.5 − x 2 −x+ 3 4

## Extensions {#fs-id1165134081136}

For the following exercises, evaluate the expression without using a
calculator. Give the exact value.

sin −1 ( 1 2 )− cos −1 ( 2 2 )+ sin −1 ( 3 2 )− cos −1 ( 1 ) cos −1 ( 3
2 )− sin −1 ( 2 2 )+ cos −1 ( 1 2 )− sin −1 ( 0 )

For the following exercises, find the function if sint= x x+1 .

cost

2x+1x+1

sect

cott

2x+1 x

cos( sin −1 ( x x+1 ) )

tan −1 ( x 2x+1 )

t

## Graphical {#fs-id1165134199416}

Graph y= sin −1 x and state the domain and range of the function.

Graph y=arccosx and state the domain and range of the function.

domain \[ −1,1 \]; range \[ 0,π \]

Graph one cycle of y= tan −1 x and state the domain and range of the
function.

For what value of x does sinx= sin −1 x? Use a graphing calculator to
approximate the answer.

approximately x=0.00

For what value of x does cosx= cos −1 x? Use a graphing calculator to
approximate the answer.

## Real-World Applications {#fs-id1165134167537}

Suppose a 13-foot ladder is leaning against a building, reaching to the
bottom of a second-ﬂoor window 12 feet above the ground. What angle, in
radians, does the ladder make with the building?

0.395 radians

Suppose you drive 0.6 miles on a road so that the vertical distance
changes from 0 to 150 feet. What is the angle of elevation of the road?

An isosceles triangle has two congruent sides of length 9 inches. The
remaining side has a length of 8 inches. Find the angle that a side of 9
inches makes with the 8-inch side.

1.11 radians

Without using a calculator, approximate the value of arctan( 10,000 ).
Explain why your answer is reasonable.

A truss (interior beam structure) for the roof of a house is constructed
from two identical right triangles. Each has a base of 12 feet and
height of 4 feet. Find the measure of the acute angle adjacent to the
4-foot side.

1.25 radians

The line y= 3 5 x passes through the origin in the *x*,*y*-plane. What
is the measure of the angle that the line makes with the positive
*x*-axis?

The line y= −3 7 x passes through the origin in the *x*,*y*-plane. What
is the measure of the angle that the line makes with the negative
*x*-axis?

0.405 radians

What percentage grade should a road have if the angle of elevation of
the road is 4 degrees? (The percentage grade is defined as the change in
the altitude of the road over a 100-foot horizontal distance. For
example a 5% grade means that the road rises 5 feet for every 100 feet
of horizontal distance.)

A 20-foot ladder leans up against the side of a building so that the
foot of the ladder is 10 feet from the base of the building. If
specifications call for the ladder\'s angle of elevation to be between
35 and 45 degrees, does the placement of this ladder satisfy safety
specifications?

No. The angle the ladder makes with the horizontal is 60 degrees.

Suppose a 15-foot ladder leans against the side of a house so that the
angle of elevation of the ladder is 42 degrees. How far is the foot of
the ladder from the side of the house?

# Chapter Review Exercises {#fs-id1165135532546}

## [Graphs of the Sine and Cosine Functions](#) {#eip-id1165135244084}

For the following exercises, graph the functions for two periods and
determine the amplitude or stretching factor, period, midline equation,
and asymptotes.

f( x )=−3cosx+3

amplitude: 3; period: 2π; midline: y=3; no asymptotes

f( x )= 1 4 sinx

f( x )=3cos( x+ π 6 )

amplitude: 3; period: 2π; midline: y=0; no asymptotes

f( x )=−2sin( x− 2π 3 )

f( x )=3sin( x− π 4 )−4

amplitude: 3; period: 2π; midline: y=−4; no asymptotes

f( x )=2( cos( x− 4π 3 )+1 )

f( x )=6sin( 3x− π 6 )−1

amplitude: 6; period: 2π 3 ; midline: y=−1; no asymptotes

f( x )=−100sin( 50x−20 )

## [Graphs of the Other Trigonometric Functions](#) {#eip-id1165133021952}

For the following exercises, graph the functions for two periods and
determine the amplitude or stretching factor, period, midline equation,
and asymptotes.

f( x )=tanx−4

stretching factor: none; period: π; midline: y=−4; asymptotes: x= π 2
+πk, where k is an integer

f( x )=2tan( x− π 6 )

f( x )=−3tan( 4x )−2

stretching factor: 3; period: π 4 ; midline: y=−2; asymptotes: x= π 8 +
π 4 k, where k is an integer

f( x )=0.2cos( 0.1x )+0.3

For the following exercises, graph two full periods. Identify the
period, the phase shift, the amplitude, and asymptotes.

f( x )= 1 3 secx

amplitude: none; period: 2π; no phase shift; asymptotes: x= π 2 k, where
k is an odd integer

f( x )=3cotx

f( x )=4csc( 5x )

amplitude: none; period: 2π 5 ; no phase shift; asymptotes: x= π 5 k,
where k is an integer

f( x )=8sec( 1 4 x )

f( x )= 2 3 csc( 1 2 x )

amplitude: none; period: 4π; no phase shift; asymptotes: x=2πk, where k
is an integer

f( x )=−csc( 2x+π )

For the following exercises, use this scenario: The population of a city
has risen and fallen over a 20-year interval. Its population may be
modeled by the following function: y=12,000+8,000sin( 0.628x ), where
the domain is the years since 1980 and the range is the population of
the city.

What is the largest and smallest population the city may have?

largest: 20,000; smallest: 4,000

Graph the function on the domain of \[ 0,40 \] .

What are the amplitude, period, and phase shift for the function?

amplitude: 8,000; period: 10; phase shift: 0

Over this domain, when does the population reach 18,000? 13,000?

What is the predicted population in 2007? 2010?

In 2007, the predicted population is 4,413. In 2010, the population will
be 11,924.

For the following exercises, suppose a weight is attached to a spring
and bobs up and down, exhibiting symmetry.

Suppose the graph of the displacement function is shown in [\#](#),
where the values on the *x*-axis represent the time in seconds and the
*y*-axis represents the displacement in inches. Give the equation that
models the vertical displacement of the weight on the spring.

<figure id="Figure_06_03_225">

</figure>

At time = 0, what is the displacement of the weight?

5 in.

At what time does the displacement from the equilibrium point equal
zero?

What is the time required for the weight to return to its initial height
of 5 inches? In other words, what is the period for the displacement
function?

10 seconds

## [Inverse Trigonometric Functions](#) {#eip-id1165132040469}

For the following exercises, find the exact value without the aid of a
calculator.

sin −1 ( 1 )

cos −1 ( 3 2 )

π 6

tan −1 ( −1 )

cos −1 ( 1 2 )

π 4

sin −1 ( − 3 2 )

sin −1 ( cos( π 6 ) )

π 3

cos −1 ( tan( 3π 4 ) )

sin( sec −1 ( 3 5 ) )

No solution

cot( sin −1 ( 3 5 ) )

tan( cos −1 ( 5 13 ) )

12 5

sin( cos −1 ( x x+1 ) )

Graph f( x )=cosx and f( x )=secx on the interval \[ 0,2π ) and explain
any observations.

The graphs are not symmetrical with respect to the line y=x. They are
symmetrical with respect to the y -axis.

Graph f(x)=sinx and f( x )=cscx and explain any observations.

Graph the function f( x )= x 1 − x 3 3! + x 5 5! − x 7 7! on the
interval \[ −1,1 \] and compare the graph to the graph of f( x )=sinx on
the same interval. Describe any observations.

The graphs appear to be identical.

# Chapter Practice Test {#fs-id1165135354994}

For the following exercises, sketch the graph of each function for two
full periods. Determine the amplitude, the period, and the equation for
the midline.

f( x )=0.5sinx

amplitude: 0.5; period: 2π; midline y=0

f( x )=5cosx

f( x )=5sinx

amplitude: 5; period: 2π; midline: y=0

f( x )=sin( 3x )

f( x )=−cos( x+ π 3 )+1

amplitude: 1; period: 2π; midline: y=1

f( x )=5sin( 3( x− π 6 ) )+4

f( x )=3cos( 1 3 x− 5π 6 )

amplitude: 3; period: 6π; midline: y=0

f( x )=tan( 4x )

f( x )=−2tan( x− 7π 6 )+2

amplitude: none; period: π; midline: y=0, asymptotes: x= 2π 3 +πk, where
k is an integer

f( x )=πcos( 3x+π )

f( x )=5csc( 3x )

amplitude: none; period: 2π 3 ; midline: y=0, asymptotes: x= π 3 k,
where k is an integer

f( x )=πsec( π 2 x )

f( x )=2csc( x+ π 4 )−3

amplitude: none; period: 2π; midline: y=−3

For the following exercises, determine the amplitude, period, and
midline of the graph, and then find a formula for the function.

Give in terms of a sine function.

Give in terms of a sine function.

amplitude: 2; period: 2; midline: y=0; f( x )=2sin( π( x−1 ) )

Give in terms of a tangent function.

For the following exercises, find the amplitude, period, phase shift,
and midline.

y=sin( π 6 x+π )−3

amplitude: 1; period: 12; phase shift: −6; midline y=−3

y=8sin( 7π 6 x+ 7π 2 )+6

The outside temperature over the course of a day can be modeled as a
sinusoidal function. Suppose you know the temperature is 68°F at
midnight and the high and low temperatures during the day are 80°F and
56°F, respectively. Assuming t is the number of hours since midnight,
find a function for the temperature, D, in terms of t.

D( t )=68−12sin( π 12 x )

Water is pumped into a storage bin and empties according to a periodic
rate. The depth of the water is 3 feet at its lowest at 2:00 a.m. and 71
feet at its highest, which occurs every 5 hours. Write a cosine function
that models the depth of the water as a function of time, and then graph
the function for one period.

For the following exercises, find the period and horizontal shift of
each function.

g( x )=3tan( 6x+42 )

period: π 6 ; horizontal shift: −7

n( x )=4csc( 5π 3 x− 20π 3 )

Write the equation for the graph in [\#](#) in terms of the secant
function and give the period and phase shift.

<figure id="Figure_06_03_246">

</figure>

f( x )=sec( πx ); period: 2; phase shift: 0

If tanx=3, find tan( −x ).

If secx=4, find sec( −x ).

4

For the following exercises, graph the functions on the specified window
and answer the questions.

Graph m( x )=sin( 2x )+cos( 3x ) on the viewing window \[ −10,10 \] by
\[ −3,3 \]. Approximate the graph's period.

Graph n( x )=0.02sin( 50πx ) on the following domains in x: \[ 0,1 \]
and \[ 0,3 \]. Suppose this function models sound waves. Why would these
views look so different?

The views are different because the period of the wave is 1 25 . Over a
bigger domain, there will be more cycles of the graph.

Graph f( x )= sinx x on \[ −0.5,0.5 \] and explain any observations.

For the following exercises, let f( x )= 3 5 cos( 6x ).

What is the largest possible value for f( x )?

3 5

What is the smallest possible value for f( x )?

Where is the function increasing on the interval \[ 0,2π \]?

On the approximate intervals ( 0.5,1 ),( 1.6,2.1 ),( 2.6,3.1 ),( 3.7,4.2
),( 4.7,5.2 ),(5.6,6.28)

For the following exercises, find and graph one period of the periodic
function with the given amplitude, period, and phase shift.

Sine curve with amplitude 3, period π 3 , and phase shift ( h,k )=( π 4
,2 )

Cosine curve with amplitude 2, period π 6 , and phase shift ( h,k )=( −
π 4 ,3 )

f( x )=2cos( 12( x+ π 4 ) )+3

For the following exercises, graph the function. Describe the graph and,
wherever applicable, any periodic behavior, amplitude, asymptotes, or
undefined points.

f( x )=5cos( 3x )+4sin( 2x )

f( x )= e sint

This graph is periodic with a period of 2π.

For the following exercises, find the exact value.

sin −1 ( 3 2 )

tan −1 ( 3 )

π 3

cos −1 ( − 3 2 )

cos −1 ( sin( π ) )

π 2

cos −1 ( tan( 7π 4 ) )

cos( sin −1 ( 1−2x ) )

1− ( 1−2x ) 2

cos −1 ( −0.4 )

cos( tan −1 ( x 2 ) )

1 1+ x 4

For the following exercises, suppose sint= x x+1 . Evaluate the
following expressions.

tant

csct

x+1 x

Given [\#](#), find the measure of angle θ to three decimal places.
Answer in radians.

<figure id="Image_06_03_255">

</figure>

For the following exercises, determine whether the equation is true or
false.

arcsin( sin( 5π 6 ) )= 5π 6

False

arccos( cos( 5π 6 ) )= 5π 6

The grade of a road is 7%. This means that for every horizontal distance
of 100 feet on the road, the vertical rise is 7 feet. Find the angle the
road makes with the horizontal in radians.

approximately 0.07 radians

# 

arccosine

another name for the inverse cosine;

arccos

x

=

cos

−

1

x

arcsine

another name for the inverse sine;

arcsin

x

=

sin

−

1

x

arctangent

another name for the inverse tangent;

arctan

x

=

tan

−

1

x

inverse cosine function

the function

cos

−

1

x

,

which is the inverse of the cosine function and the angle that has a
cosine equal to a given number

inverse sine function

the function

sin

−

1

x

,

which is the inverse of the sine function and the angle that has a sine
equal to a given number

inverse tangent function

the function

tan

−

1

x

,

which is the inverse of the tangent function and the angle that has a
tangent equal to a given number
